Madam Speaker!
1. Let me start by thanking Allah for granting me the privilege and the
responsibility for presenting the Federal Budget, for the fiscal year 2010-11, the
third budget of this Government. I also want to start by recognizing the historic
role of this House. This House is democratically elected. It has met high standards
of parliamentary discourse and has passed landmark legislation. Above all, this
House has restored the 1973 Constitution to its original purity. For this I want to
congratulate you Madam Speaker, the Leader of the House, Prime Minister Yusuf
Raza Gilani, the Leader of the Opposition, Chaudhry Nisar Ali Khan and all the
members. It is only appropriate that the Constitution has been restored by a
coalition led by the party of Shaheed Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, the architect of the 1973
Constitution who brought the leadership of the entire federation to come together
in one of the shining moments of our history. I may also congratulate President
Asif Ali Zardari for his leadership in making the passage of the 18th amendment
possible. Let us also celebrate that Pakistan has again found collective solutions 
2
on key outstanding issues like 7th NFC Award, the granting of provincial rights
and the abolition of the concurrent list.
Madam Speaker!
2. It is my intention to introduce in this budget a fresh approach to economic
management that will complement these momentous political reforms with
responsible economic and fiscal management. The people clearly want a
government that is capable of taking hard decisions and leading them to a bright
future.
Madam Speaker!
3. These are extraordinary times. Over the last two years the world has gone
through the worst recession since the 2nd World War. The global economy has
contracted following the sub-prime crises in the USA. We have seen iconic
names crash to the ground. AIG and Citi Group lost most of their capitalization;
Lehman Brothers and other well known names vanished. This global storm
ravaged many countries and continues to do so. No region of the world has been
unaffected. Unemployment in the USA touched a 25 years high above 10%.
Currently, the downturn is severely affecting some European countries like
Greece, Spain and Portugal which were thought to be more stable and are part of
the EU. Greece alone has been recently bailed out by the IMF and the EU, with
one of the largest rescue packages ever.
4. Pakistan’s economy also suffered due to the global down turn, the security
situation in the neighborhood, and policy weaknesses. The fragility in our fiscal
and balance of payments situation was exposed. The economy recorded an
inflation rate of 25%— the highest in the last three decades. Economic growth fell 
3
to 1.2 percent ––the lowest in three decades. Pressures mounted on reserves. The
exchange rate had to depreciate.
Madam Speaker!
5. In the face of this unprecedented economic crisis, your government had to
take difficult, even unpopular decisions. These decisions included: (i) adjusting
the price of those items, whose international prices had risen; (ii) curtailment of
expenditures; (iii) and adoption of a tight monetary policy. The government also
had to enter into a programme with the IMF to secure balance of payments
support and prevent a default.
6. Throughout the adjustment process, the weak segments of society and the
poor were not forgotten. To name one example: The Benazir Income Support
Programme was introduced. This program alone provides Rs.1000 a month to
support 3.5 million households.
Madam Speaker!
7. I am happy to report that we are seeing the beginning of an economic
recovery. Inflation has moderated considerably although we still need to bring it
down further. GDP growth has begun to turn upward reaching 4.1 percent in the
outgoing year. Foreign Exchange Reserves have surpassed US$16 billion.
Remittances are up sharply to a record level of US$ 8.5 billion. The premium on
Pakistani debt has decreased substantially while our credit rating has improved. I
am reminded of a famous quote of Shaheed Mohtarma Benazir Bhutto who once
remarked: 
4
“…the success of a nation, as we head towards a new century, shall be
based upon its level of exports, hard currency reserves, its per capita
GNP, and creative genius of its citizens”.
Madam Speaker!
8. We seem to be heading towards this thought process of Shaheed
Mohtarma. We have been successful in achieving a measure of macroeconomic
stabilization, checking inflation, restoration of a growth momentum, effectively
managing our international commitments, and developing innovative schemes for
the disadvantaged. There are, however, areas where we could have done better:
domestic resource mobilization, reform of public sector enterprises and in dealing
with severe energy shortages. I also remain conscious that job creation is less
than adequate.
Madam Speaker!
9. This budget represents several departures from the past. In making this
budget, we have placed our faith in the people of Pakistan. Our first point of
differentiation is that this budget is based on transparency in the budgetary
process. We have had a widespread consultation with many segments of society.
These consultations have included Economists, Chambers of Commerce,
Consumer groups, Parliamentary Committees, Provincial Governments, media
and industry representatives. All information, statistics and data have been openly
shared. This budget has become, perhaps the most debated, scrutinized and
commented upon budget in Pakistan’s history.
10. Keeping our faith in the public and honesty of approach, the second
differentiating feature is that we have kept the budget realistic. This realism in 
5
budgeting will allow federal and provincial departments and institutions and other
economic agents plan better. In this manner, expectations of participants in the
economy are anchored and they have better predictability of their plans.
11. The third differentiating feature of the budget is that it is the first budget
after the new NFC Award. The co-operation, partnership, and enhanced role for
the provinces is an integral part of this budget, reflecting the will of the people.
The additional transfer of financial resources to the provinces means more money
for law and order, education, health, drinking water and municipal services.
Correspondingly, this means reduced fiscal space for the federal government and
an incentive for better management of its diminished resources. It also means that
Federal Government spending on social sectors would be limited generally to
tertiary levels of education and health with major responsibility for these sectors
shifted to the provinces.
12. The fourth differentiating feature of the budget is that we are operating in
the framework of international commitments. It is important that we as a
sovereign nation keep our commitments and do not erode our international
credibility. While maintaining our commitments we must ensure that we become
self-reliant and less dependent on foreign loans and assistance.
13. The fifth and most important aspect of our current situation is that of
security. We are faced with a situation where our armed forces, jawans, rangers,
paramilitary, police and other security forces are sacrificing their lives and
engaged in hardship for the safety of our land and citizens. I want to salute them
all. I want them to know that this House and the whole nation is behind them. We
will do all we can to support our valiant soldiers. 
6
Madam Speaker!
14. Before turning to the objectives of the budget, I would like to place the
budget in the perspective of economic management. In today’s world, economic
management of a modern internationally open economy is a continuous year-long
task. The budget is but one important instrument of economic management.
However, the importance of this once a year ritual should not be overly
exaggerated. There are important linkages between the budget and other
instruments of government policies, including monetary; trade; pricing of
agriculture, electricity, gas and petroleum products as well as various economic
packages. We need to sharpen our understanding of the role of the government
and its interventions and make them more effective. Ultimately results depend on
the impact of a combination of these policies. This is what economic management
is all about.
Madam Speaker!
15. The ultimate objective of the budget—indeed of all government
endeavours—is to improve the welfare of the people. The citizens of Pakistan are
at the center of the budget. In order to achieve this goal we have decided to lay
primary focus on the following objectives:
16. Our First objective is that we must protect the economic recovery.
Stabilizing the economy is a precondition for generating the momentum for
growth. The recovery that has been achieved remains fragile. The dangers of
slippage are high. The international situation remains fragile. The security
concerns have not vanished. The budget deficit is still high. And we continue to
remain dependent on external assistance. We will therefore continue to follow—
7
indeed reinforce—fiscal austerity. Waste will be eliminated, expenditures tightly
controlled, and the policy mix carefully managed for a strong and stable recovery.
17. The second objective is that we must check inflation. High inflation is
devastating, especially for the poor. The best relief package we can offer is to do
whatever we can to reduce inflation. Why did inflation rise? This issue is debated
all the time. Different points of view are forwarded by experts. But on one point
all agree—that “inflation is primarily a monetary phenomenon.” What this means,
and is true for Pakistan, is that it is caused by excessive credit expansion. In our
case, we have borrowed heavily, our borrowing continues to increase rapidly,
including from the State Bank. All of us know such borrowing from the State
Bank means a rise in the rate of inflation.
Madam Speaker!
18. The third objective is to achieve a measure of self reliance through better
domestic resource mobilization. By this means we will be able reduce our reliance
on loans. Indiscriminate borrowing over the last four years has brought us to a
debt level of 55 percent of GDP which is approaching the limit under the Fiscal
Responsibility and Debt Limitation Act. This borrowing by the government also
means higher interest rates and crowding out of the private sector. If we do not
control our expenditures, and raise resources, we run the risk of being
permanently in debt. High fiscal deficits have also curtailed our development
budget.
19. The fourth objective is the reform and enhancement of our social
protection regime. Innovative schemes, better targeting of the subsidies for the
needy and eliminating waste could allow rapid poverty alleviation. 
8
20. The fifth objective is the reduction of the burden of public sector
enterprises without which we will never be able to achieve a sustainable fiscal
situation. All efforts to gain control of the economic situation are hostage to a few
badly managed public sector enterprises. The productivity and efficiency of every
sector of our economy is badly compromised because of the failure of the PSEs.
21. The sixth objective would be that the recovery must not be jobless.
Employment generation will be an important test of our policies. Our youth, the
largest segment of our population will expect this.
Madam Speaker!
22. The seventh objective would be to make the country fertile for investment.
Our nascent recovery can only be sustained through increased investment and
results by the private sector. Indeed the role of the government should be
primarily that of facilitating investment. We want to be able to show the people of
Pakistan that the growth rate achieved in many Asian countries can also be
attained in Pakistan. In order to achieve growth, we must make Pakistan attractive
for investment. Surveys of competitiveness and cost of doing business suggest
that reforms need to be undertaken to improve governance and markets in
Pakistan. In order to attract investment we also need to emphasize productivity
and efficiency, given our limited resource availability.
Madam Speaker!
23. Let me now elaborate on two areas that have a direct bearing on some of
the objectives listed above: energy and food security. Both these areas will be
receiving greater attention and will be allocated greater amounts both in the
Public Sector Development Program and from external assistance programs such 
9
as the Kerry Lugar, World Bank, Asian Development Bank and other bilateral
assistance programs.
24. Madam Speaker! Energy shortages have darkened homes, closed down
factories and shops, making life difficult and slowing down economic activity.
The government is fully conscious of the difficulties faced by the people due to
the prevailing energy crisis. The crisis has arisen because of poor policy choices
in the past and underdevelopment of domestic energy sources such as hydel, coal,
and natural gas. It is compounded by high oil prices and inefficiencies due to
public sector management.
25. We have used a consultative approach with some success in dealing with
immediate shortages. An Energy Summit was convened with the participation of
all Chief Ministers and private sector stakeholders to frame a conservation plan
for the electricity sector. As a result of the initiatives agreed during the summit,
including the key issue of inter corporate circular debt, the nation witnessed some
relief in load shedding. Nearly, 1000 MW was saved which brought some relief to
domestic consumers as well as provided some extra energy to the industry.
26. Prime Minister’s Vision of the Power Sector contains a number of
measures to increase supply, manage demand through energy conservation and
take administrative measures to streamline the transmission and distribution of
electricity. In the short-term, efficiency and conservation measures being
undertaken are;
• Diversion of natural gas to power plants to improve their efficiency.
• Rehabilitation of generation and transmission infrastructure.
• Free distribution of 30 million energy savers 
10
Madam Speaker!
27. We also propose to take measures to enhance the supply of electricity. In
the medium and long-term we plan to create an optimal energy mix to produce
energy at affordable prices through hydel, coal and renewable sources.
28. In order to secure private sector investment in the power sector in a
transparent manner, an Energy Development Fund is being established in
consultation with Asian Development Bank. The proposed fund is likely to be
started with seed money of Rs. 20 billion.
29. We have also taken steps to increase the availability of gas and the IranPakistan Pipeline project has finally been signed after 17 years of work. The
Government is also committed to import LNG in a transparent manner.
30. I must stress that a deep structural reform effort is required in the energy
sector if we are to provide affordable energy to the growing economy. We intend
to take this action forward this year. In FY 2010-11, an allocation of Rs.131
billion has been made for hydel, thermal and nuclear energy projects to augment
generation and improve transmission.
Madam Speaker!
31. The second area of our focus is food security, with emphasis on the
development of agriculture and water resources. In this effort we will emphasize
sharp increase in productivity. Agriculture must find more productive solutions
based on more efficient markets that provide incentives for improved technology
with better water and input utilization. In addition to food availability we seek to
ensure that the poor have the means to purchase food, and this is critical in 
11
supporting the vulnerable. Without adequate purchasing power the poor may
starve in the midst of plenty.
32. Our special programme for food security and productivity enhancement
for smaller farmers, covering 13,000 villages starting with 1,012 villages in all
provinces, has commenced successfully and is expected to gather momentum.
33. We are committed to managing our water resources better. Several
initiatives have been taken. I would like to draw your attention to the raising of
Mangla Dam, Gomal Zam Dam and Satpara Dam, which would be completed in
FY 2010-11. This will substantially add to the availability of water.
34. Diamir-Basha Dam shall be launched as a mega project in FY 2010-11
which would generate 4500 MW electricity and store 6,450 MAF water. It is
gratifying to share that the “resettlement chapter” has been conclusively settled by
the Government which would now enable us to fast track this project.
35. As a testimony to our efforts at attaining food security the combined
budgeted allocation in Development Budget 2010-11 for water, food and
agriculture, livestock and dairy development sectors is in excess of Rs 40 billion.
Madam Speaker!
36. Let me now turn to the reform of PSEs, which is one of our important
budgetary objectives. Lack of attention to this reform is subverting all efforts at
stabilization and economic revival. 
12
37. Pakistan’s public sector enterprises are inefficient and have very poor
management, generating huge losses which are then passed on to the economy
and the budget. Power sector enterprises alone cost the exchequer around Rs 180
billion in FY 2009-10 while Railways, PIA, TCP, PASSCO, Steel Mills, NHA
and Utility Stores add an additional Rs 65 billion. The large loss of Rs.245 billion
destabilizes the entire budgetary process exposing us to breaching our debt
ceiling. As a result we are continually seeking external assistance. Not dealing
with this issue makes our entire budgetary process and expenditure control
unmanageable. It also leaves no room for development expenditure. This is an
issue that we wish to address with some urgency in the coming year.
38. Let me commit that restructuring of the eight major Public Sector
Enterprises would be the major objective of the Government during FY 2010-11.
A restructuring model along with timelines, approved by the Cabinet will be
implemented. Hemorrhaging in the PSEs is causing a drag on our economy. We
must make these PSEs financially solvent.
Madam Speaker!
39. I would now provide some details of the social protection program of the
government which has linkages with our efforts to protect the poor and the
vulnerable while driving growth.
40. At present, our subsidies regime does not distinguish between the rich and
the poor, and much of our subsidy spending goes to the well-to-do groups in
society that do not need it. We must ensure that only the poor receive public
subsidies. 
13
41. The government is deeply sensitive to the needs of the poor. For the first
time we have developed a subsidy program that clearly targets only the poor —
the Benazir Income Support Programme (BISP). This will remain the
government’s main program for targeted cash grants to the poorest of the poor.
Rs 46 billion would be disbursed in the outgoing year, and we will increase the
outlays to Rs 50 billion next year to benefit four million families.
42. The Government will develop innovative schemes for benefitting the poor.
In this connection, a health insurance scheme (Waseela-e-Sehet) has been
introduced on a pilot basis to provide health insurance cover of Rs 25,000/- per
family per year for hospitalization.
43. The government is fully conscious that beneficiaries of BISP need to
graduate into income earning individuals. We are designing a comprehensive exit
strategy based on international best practices. Several initiatives have already
been taken. For example, Waseela-e-Haq provides self employment through
setting up of small businesses. Vocational training to one person of a beneficiary
family is also been launched.
44. In addition, Pakistan Baitul Maal shall continue to run pro-poor
programmes with an allocation of Rs 2 billion.
Madam Speaker!
45. A landmark achievement of the government is giving ownership to
workers in state-owned enterprises under Benazir Employees Stock Option
Scheme. To empower the workers and give them ownership rights, 12% shares 
14
have been given to the workers in State-owned Enterprises. The scheme would
help improve productivity and add value to the earnings of the workers.
Madam Speaker!
46. Our Government historically has been conscious of labour rights.
Consequently, under the new Labour Policy for FY 2010-11 the minimum wage
of workers has been raised from Rs 6,000 to Rs 7,000. To ensure its
implementation, it has been made mandatory for the employer to make salary
payments to the workers through banks. Similarly, dowry grant for daughters of
workers has been enhanced to Rs 70,000 and the facility would be available for
all the daughters instead of two as was the previous policy. The wage threshold
for receiving social security benefits by the workers has been raised to Rs
10,000/-.
47. Our youth is the future of the nation. A key goal of our economic policy is
the development of skilled youth engaged in productive employment. For this we
have developed the “National Internship Program” which provides a one year
internship to young unemployed postgraduates from all over the country. The
interns work on various governmental projects and receive a monthly stipend of
Rs. 10,000. Their employability increases after completion of their internship.
More than 27,000 interns have benefitted in FY 2009-10. Rs 3.6 billion have been
allocated in the budget for the National Internship Programme in FY 2010-11.
Madam Speaker!
48. I now present the Salient Features of the Budget 2010-11. 
15
i. The overall size of the budget, including provinces, is projected at Rs.
3259 billion which is 10.7% higher than the current year’s outlay. The
total revenues are projected at Rs.2574 billion. This translates into a
projected fiscal deficit of Rs.685 billion (4.0% of GDP). Gross federal
revenues (tax and non-tax) are projected at Rs.2411 billion.
ii. FBR collection is projected at Rs.1667 billion (tax-to-GDP ratio of
9.8%).
iii. A sum of Rs.1033 billion will be transferred to the provinces under the
7th NFC Award compared to Rs.655 billion estimated during the
current financial year.
iv. The federal budgetary outlay is proposed at Rs.2229 billion (13.1% of
GDP).
v. As an austerity measure, a cut shall be imposed on all budgeted nonsalary current expenditure which shall stand frozen at 2009-10 level.
Madam Speaker!
49. Government remains committed to capital investment necessary to support
our growth. The size of the PSDP 2010-11 is Rs.663 billion including Federal
Component of Rs.280 billion plus Rs 10 billion for Earthquake Rehabilitation
(ERRA).
50. We have kept PSDP 2010-11 at a realistic level. This will facilitate
predictable, timely and automatic releases for project implementing agencies.
51. We prioritized available resources for completion of ongoing projects and
managed to complete 216 projects in transport, power and the social sectors
which include;
a. Mansehra-Naran-Jhalkhad road, 
16
b. Completion of 106 km of Nutal-Sibbi-Dhadar road,
c. 124 km of D.I.Khan-Zam Tower-Mughal Kot,
d. Procurement of 69 DE locos by Pakistan Railways
e. Doubling of track from Lodhran-Khanewal.
f. 72 MW Khan-Khawar Hydropower project is due for
commissioning this month
g. Right Bank Outfall Drainage-III project is ready for
commissioning
h. Higher Education Commission completed 86 projects
i. Ministry of Health expanded its Lady Health Worker’s programme
from 90,000 to 104,000 workers.
52. Early completion of projects will be the key objective of PSDP in 2010-
11. Some of the important projects marked for completion are as follows:
a. 300 MW Chashma Nuclear Power Plant
b. 1600-1800 Km of highways
c. 200 Km on Gwadar-Ratodero Road upto Hoshab,
d. Rahim Yar Khan-Bahawalpur Additional Carriageway (166 Km)
e. Gomal Zam dam,
f. Satpara dam
g. Impoundment of water in Mangla Dam which will add 3 MAF of
storage
h. Karachi Bulk Water Supply scheme,
i. Chaghi Water Management and Agricultural Development
j. Polytechnic Institute for Girls in Turbat
Madam Speaker!
53. We are also very serious about expenditure control. Some important
steps that are being taken in this regard are as follows: 
17
i. Obtain Cabinet approval for any supplementary grants beyond 10% of
the approved budget.
ii. Present report on quarterly budget outturn to the National Assembly to
ensure parliamentary oversight.
iii. Streamline releases against PSDP allocations with upfront
authority/release of funds to ensure smooth implementation of
development projects.
iv. Ensure that proposals for approval of ECC/ Cabinet having fiscal impact
would be Budget neutral i.e. additional revenues or savings would be
identified at the time of approval.
Madam Speaker!
54. After the passage of 18th amendment, a Transition Committee has been
constituted with a mandate to oversee the transition of subjects to the provinces in
the erstwhile concurrent list. The said Committee would finalize devolution of
such subjects before June 2011. It is expected that the number of federal
ministries and divisions would be reduced during this period creating some fiscal
space.
Madam Speaker!
55. Allow me to submit the highlights of taxation proposals for the year
2010-11. The tax measures being proposed by the government are fair, just and
equitable guided by the principle of ‘ability to pay’ set in context of a war
economy.
Customs
56. No customs duty on any product will be increased. For twenty nine
categories of products, customs duties will be simplified and reduced. 
18
57. In order to reduce the price of vegetable ghee and oil, reduction in duty on
import of Crude Palm Oil is proposed from Rs.9,000/MT to Rs. 8,000/MT. This
measure will provide relief to the general public.
58. To provide relief to the sick, concessionary import of 6 additional medical
raw materials and medicines is being proposed. The import of X-ray film is also
proposed to be exempted from customs duty.
59. In order to address the energy crisis and to encourage use of Renewable
Energy Resources, import of four dedicated items in use of these resources is
proposed to be allowed at a concessionary rate of 5% import duty. The
government has already allowed duty free import of Energy Saving Lamps. In
order to encourage local manufacturers of these lamps, five more inputs used in
their production are being proposed to be exempted from customs duty.
60. In order to reduce the manufacturing cost of soap and detergent, duty rates
on their raw materials, Coconut Acid Oil and Sodium sulphate are proposed to be
reduced from 15% to 10%.
61. In order to encourage value addition and export of rice, its processing
machines are proposed to be exempted from customs duty.
62. Road Sweeping Lorries imported by civic bodies are being proposed to be
allowed at concessionary rate of 5% duty.
Sales Tax
Madam Speaker!
63. The Government of Pakistan is committed to reform the existing system of
General Sales Tax. The existing General Sates Tax (GST) has degenerated into 
19
an unfair tax, with multiple rates (between 16% and 25 %), exemptions and
domestic zero rated facilities for vested groups and the privileged. It has also
contributed greatly to the opportunities for corruption and rent seeking. The
proposed GST reforms, will address both policy and administrative shortcomings
of our current GST to remove all the deficiencies listed above.
64. The proposed GST reform:
o Will eliminate multiple tax rates and replace it with a single lower rate
of 15 %.
o Will not apply on health, education and food items consumed by the
poor.
o Will not apply to turnover less than Rs. 7.5 million per year where as
the current threshold is Rs 5 million per year.
o Will be automated thus reducing possibilities of corruption and refund
delay.
o Will broaden the tax base instead of burdening the existing tax payer
thus introducing greater equity into the tax system
65. We expect the proposed GST reform to be in place by October 1, 2010 in
consultation with all the provinces and other stakeholders.
66. Meanwhile as an interim measure the GST rates are proposed to be raised
by 1 percentage point. Once the reform GST is in place the proposed single lower
rate of 15 % will become effective. In addition, an accompanying relief measure
of the GST reform will be the abolition of the current 1% Special Excise Duty
presently levied on most items of imports and local manufacture.
20
Federal Excise Duty
67. FED incidence on all categories of cigarettes is proposed to be enhanced.
It is also proposed to levy FED at Rs. 1 per filter rod of cigarettes. This levy is
proposed to be adjustable by registered manufacturers which will also discourage
illicit production of low quality and harmful cigarettes. It will generate additional
revenue to cope with the health system costs of effects of smoking.
68. In order to fulfill Government’s obligation under the 7th NFC Award, the
rate of FED on natural gas is proposed to be increased to Rs. 10 per MMBTU.
69. To discourage consumption of electricity intensive appliances, levy of
FED @ 10% ad valorem on air conditioners and deep freezers is proposed.
Madam Speaker!
Income Tax
70. A number of relief measures in income tax have been proposed in the
Finance Bill. These are:
 - Exemption limit for the salaried taxpayers to be enhanced from Rs
200,000 to Rs.300,000 benefiting approximately 430,000 taxpayers.
• Exemption limit for non – salary income is also proposed to be
raised from Rs.100,000 to Rs.300,000 per year benefiting
approximately 350,000 taxpayers.

 - Rate of income tax collected along with monthly electricity bill from
industrial and commercial consumers is proposed to be reduced from
10% to 5%. This will provide a relief of Rs.4.5 billion to the 66,000
taxpayers
- Under the Prime Minister’s Fiscal Relief Package to Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa, FATA & PATA additional tax relief of about Rs.2 
21
Billion have been provided to benefit 300,000 taxpayers of this
province.
- Instead of monthly withholding tax statements, now only quarterly
withholding statement will be required to be e-filed. A large number of
taxpayers will benefit from reduction in this sizeable compliance
requirement which will further bring down the cost of doing business
in the country.
- Taxation on interest free/concessionary interest loans provided by an
employer is proposed to be waived.
71. In order to further facilitate taxpayers and to incentivize the foreign
investment a number of steps are also proposed to be taken for improvement in
Direct Taxes:
- rate of final withholding tax on non-specified payments to nonresidents is to be reduced from 30% to 20%
- Tax free payments to non-residents on profits on debt will be allowed
- 10% tax credit for balancing, modernization and replacement to all
companies.
- A 5% tax credit is proposed to be allowed to a company in the tax year
of its enlistment.
- 10% withholding tax as final charge on profit on debt (in debt
instruments), and also for the investment in government securities
(treasury bills and PIBs) to allow hassle free compliance by nonresidents.
72. Number of taxation measures, aimed at rationalizing tax structure are
proposed as below: 
22
- It is proposed that income tax be raised for the Association of Persons
(AOPs) at a flat rate of 25% against the existing progressive rate
averaging up to 20%. This step will encourage corporatization.
- Tax on short-term Capital Gains on stocks/ shares will be charged at
10% where shares are held for a period less than six months and at
7.5% where they are held for more than six months and less than 12
months. However, stocks held for over one year will not be subject to
CGT.
- The withholding tax rate payable by commercial importers is proposed
to be increased from 4% to 5%
- A withholding tax on banking transactions including withdrawal
through demand draft, pay order, RTCs, CDRs etc. will be charged at
0.3% where such transaction exceeds Rs.25000 in a day.
- Turnover tax on loss making companies and AOPs is proposed to be
increased from 0.5% to 1%
- Withholding tax on domestic air travel is proposed to be charged at 5%
on gross value of the ticket
Madam Speaker!
73. I would now like to address the issue of compensation of government
servants. The recommendations of the Pay and Pension Commission as adopted
by the government would be implemented over the next three years. The
following decisions are being announced for implementation with effect from 1st
July 2010:
a. Federal Government employees will be allowed an adhoc monthly
allowance equal to 50% of one month’s basic pay. This benefit
would not be available to such federal government employees who 
23
are already in receipt of a monthly allowance equal to one month’s
basic pay.
b. Medical allowance for employees in BS-1 to 15 would be doubled.
For employees working in BPS-16 to 22, medical allowance will
be allowed at 15% of monthly basic pay.
c. Pensioners who are retired after 2001 will be allowed 15% increase
and those who retired prior to 2001 will be allowed 20% increase.
d. Pensioners who retired in BS 1 to 15 will be allowed medical
allowance at 25% of pension drawn while those retired in BS 16 to
22 will be allowed medical allowance at 20% of pension drawn.
e. The minimum monthly pension is proposed to be raised from
Rs.2000 to Rs.3000.
f. The rate of family pension is proposed to be enhanced from 50% to
75%.
g. A number of other minor allowances for employees in BS-1 to 16
namely, night duty allowance, conveyance allowance for late
sitting staff, daily allowance and special pay are proposed to be
raised substantially.
Madam Speaker!
74. I may now announce a new intervention which aims at employment
generation for rural unskilled workers. Under this scheme the unskilled workers in
rural areas would be guaranteed employment for one hundred days in a year. The
main feature of this scheme would be carrying out of small local level works with
a guaranteed daily wage equal to the minimum wage. A pilot scheme will be
launched in 120 union councils in 12 least developed districts, and others that
have suffered the most due to the security situation. A training element will also 
24
be added to provide skills that would facilitate absorption into the labour market.
An amount of Rs 5 billion shall be provided for this programme, which shall be
financed from the savings to be made by freezing the non-salary component of the
non-development expenditure of the civil government at the level of last year.
200,000 households are expected to benefit from this scheme in FY 2010-11.
Madam Speaker!
75. I would like to thank my Cabinet colleagues and members of this august
house for their support in the finalization of this Budget. I would also like to
thank all others who have tirelessly contributed in the preparation of this Budget.
Madam Speaker!
76. Before I conclude, let me recap what I had stated at the beginning of my
speech. I had said that in this budget we would attempt to lay down a direction
for the economic management of the country. The intention was to present a way
forward in which each of us as a citizen could participate and contribute to a
common cause.
77. Our morale as a nation should be strengthened as our economy does not
face the kind of stress being faced by many other economies. Policy action on
many fronts is underway. The path of recovery is slowly taking hold but key
structural issues present challenges to economic management. The Budget seeks
to address these challenges to shape a more austere, efficient and fundamentally
self reliant economy.
78. We will continue to chart a stable course for the economy, build efficiency
in the way we do business, increase jobs for the under privileged and lay down 
25
policies that encourage investment opportunities for the entrepreneurs. Let there
be no doubt in the minds of the people that there exists tremendous upside
potential in the economy and the country. It is up to all of us to harness the
potential to the best of our ability.
79. We have shown our ability to put aside our political differences and face
difficult challenges in a spirit of harmony and togetherness. Continuing with this
spirit we have the ability to carve out a golden future for our country.
Government will continue to play the role of providing an enabling environment
for all the citizens to fully engage in the process of economic development.
80. Let me conclude with the words of the father of the nation, Quaid-e-Azam
Muhammad Ali Jinnah on the occasion of the creation of our nation which are
perhaps equally relevant today:
81. “Let us now plan to build and reconstruct and regenerate our great
nation… It is in your hands. We have undoubtedly talents. Pakistan is blessed
with enormous resources and potentialities. Providence has endowed us with all
the wealth of nature and now it lies with man to make the best of it.”
82. Madam Speaker, Even today our destiny is in our own hands! Let us as a
nation united go forward and make it into a reality!
Pakistan Zindabad