Mr. Speaker,
1. As I rise to present the first budget of the newly elected government I
want to thank Allah (SWT) for bestowing this singular honor on me. It is not a
mere occasion of presenting a budget. It is marking a major transition in the
country, where one elected government has completed its full term and after
holding the general elections, transition to a new democratic government is
being peacefully accomplished. The nation should be proud of the fact that
this one step is a leap forward in establishing a democratic polity in the
country.
2. As the Prime Minister, in his address in the National Assembly has
said, a new beginning in Pakistan is about to start. He has given the message
of HOPE and OPTIMISM. He has declared that Pakistanis are second to none
and that our destiny is nothing but progress. He will lead the nation to a new
world, where Pakistan will regain its lost status in the comity of nations,
reassert its due respect and identity in the world and elicit due reverence and
dignity in return.
3. On the economic front he has laid out comprehensive a agenda of
reform to reinvigorate the economy, spur growth, maintain price stability,
provide jobs to the youth and rebuild the key infrastructure of the country.
Budget Speech 2013-14
2
Mr. Speaker,
4. My enthusiasm, however, is seriously dampened as I discover that the
new government is inheriting a broken economy. From economic growth to
prices, from revenues to expenditure, from public debt to circular debt, from
monetary expansion to interest rates, from exchange rate to foreign exchange
reserves and sustainability of balance of payments, I wish I could identify one
single area where their economic management was in the best national
interest. Indeed, there has been complete absence of management rather the
economy was run on autopilot and its inherent strengths and weaknesses
played out at their own without any real contribution of policy. Viewed in this
perspective, the verdict of the last elections may be termed as the public
accountability of the mismanagement practiced at an unprecedented level by
the outgoing government.
Mr. Speaker,
5. I will point out four or five key indicators to allow the members to
appreciate how poorly the economy has performed in the last five years:
(1) The growth rate has averaged less than 3% in the last five
years, which is significantly below our potential; if the growth in
population, which is about 2% per annum, is considered, it
becomes clear that the increase in per capita income over this
period has been merely 1%, which is not satisfactory.
(2) The inflation has averaged around 13%, which is unprecedented
in the last four decades;
(3) The exchange rate was around Rs.62/$ and it now stands at
about Rs.100/$ depreciating by a whopping 60%;
(4) State Bank Reserves were around $11.1 billion and they are
leaving behind $6.3 billion despite having obtained significant
support from IMF;
(5) There was virtually no circular debt of mentionable size; today,
and after paying about Rs1481 billion in tariff differential 
Budget Speech 2013-14
3
subsidies, it is known to all that a gigantic circular debt of Rs.503
billion is crippling the power sector and fiscal system of the
country.
(6) The average deficit in the last five years was recorded at about
7%, which is unprecedented in country’s recent history.
(7) The public debt stood at Rs.5,602 billion on 31
st March 2008,
which is now projected to rise to 14,284 billion by 30th June,
2013, implying a 2.5 times (255%) increase in country’s
indebtedness. Even on the basis of Debt to GDP comparison
the ratio rose from 52.6% of GDP to 63.5% representing an
increase of nearly 10 percentage points in country’s debt
burden. I might add here that the total public debt of Pakistan
which accumulated between 1947 and 30th June 1999 was
around Rs.3000 billion.
6. These are just a few glimpses of the economic landscape that PML (N)
has inherited. I have mentioned them for the sake of setting a benchmark
from where we are starting. We are dismayed by this inheritance but not
discouraged or disheartened. If any thing, our resolve to put things right has
only strengthened after realization of the severity of challenges we are facing.
Under the leadership of Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif our party is
determined to turn the tide and not just restore the health of the economy but
take it to new heights by enabling it to realize its full potential.
Mr. Speaker,
7. The budget I have the honor to present today is not a mere balancing
of revenues and expenditures of the government. It is the statement of
economic policy of the PML (N) government that we will pursue during the
course of our tenure. It is based on the Manifesto our party announced before
it launched its election campaign. In this respect, it is the declaration of our
intent to fulfill all promises that we made to the nation while seeking this
broad-based mandate the nation has bestowed on Mian Muhammad Nawaz
Sharif.
Budget Speech 2013-14
4
Economic Vision
Mr. Speaker,
8. At the outset, I would like to articulate the economic vision that will be
guiding our efforts in rebuilding the economy. It comprises the following
elements:
(1) First, we want to build an economy that is not dependent on
others except through trade and investment, based on
competitive advantage and market considerations. We are a
strong nation of nearly 185 million people and a nuclear power.
As much as we need to defend our frontiers, we need to protect
our economic sovereignty also, which would only be possible
when we refuse to live on handouts and foreign goodwill. Selfreliance has to be our real goal, for only then we will earn the
needed respect in the ranks of the nations.
(2) Second, the private sector has to be the lynchpin of economic
activities, shouldering the largest burden of economic functions.
A government too occupied in carrying out business activities
that can best be done by the private sector through a market
mechanism is indeed a prescription for distorting the entire
economic system and creating inequities in its functioning. Of
course, markets have to be regulated so that competitive
environment is ensured. Indeed, because we were too occupied
in managing businesses we have grossly neglected the
regulatory role of the government, to the detriment of
safeguarding consumers’ interests.
(3) Third, the only areas where government’s presence in economic
affairs can be justified is where investments are too large for
private sector to undertake and/or markets are unlikely to
function for lack of adequate commercial returns even though
social returns will be very high, such as in education, health,
population welfare and large infrastructure projects. Since social 
Budget Speech 2013-14
5
sector functions have been devolved to provinces, and for whom
we will make adequate resources available, at the federal level
our primary focus would be to radically alter and upgrade the
fast depleting physical infrastructure of the country, most notably
in the case of power sector where widespread shortages are
seriously stifling the growth potential of our economy.
(4) Fourth, all segments of the population must share the burden of
resource mobilization for running the government. The culture of
exemptions and concessions must end to build a self-reliant
economy. By the same token, if for reasons noted earlier,
government has to undertake an economic service, full cost of
operations must be recovered. Non-recovery of cost, through
subsidies and non-payment, may provide temporary relief, but it
is an assured prescription for disruptive supplies and unviable
operations for the companies providing those services.
(5) Fifth, government must limit itself within the broader limits
imposed by the available resources, primarily determined by
revenues collected through different taxes. On this account
government’s performance generally has been dismal, as it has
been incurring expenditures far in excess of our income. I will
say more on this later in my speech.
(6) Sixth, we have to protect our weak and poor segments of
population. People of this country or for that matter any other
nation, are our real strength. The marginalized groups represent
a reservoir of potentialities which if realized will change the
destiny of any nation. It is in this perspective that we have to
treat our poor and weak segments of population with care and
inclusion. Such are also the groups most vulnerable to extremist
ideologies if neglected. Building a reliable and accessible social
safety net for these peoples is an imperative that we will be
committed to fulfill.
9. Even though this is a simple vision we have strayed from this path for a
long period of time. In the meanwhile, powerful interest groups have emerged
who would like the country to continue to walk along the familiar but distorted
Budget Speech 2013-14
6
path. In our view, we have lost considerable time in failing to give a
predictable and stable path to our economy. We should not waste any more
time in creating a definite and unmistakable direction for our economy so that
investors can make long-term decisions, both domestic and foreign and our
identity, inherent in the above vision, is firmly established in the eyes of the
world.
10. This budget will unfold the implementation plan for this vision. This
vision will not be realized tomorrow rather it is a long journey that we have to
travel steadfastly. However, a journey of thousand miles starts with first steps,
and that is what, Mr. Speaker, this House will see that in this budget we will
be laying the foundations for realization of this vision.
Main Elements of Budget Strategy
Mr. Speaker
11. Let me turn to specific policy measures we are adopting in the present
budget to address challenges facing the economy and their solutions:
(1) Reduction of fiscal deficit: At the outset, let me state that the
main plank of our budget strategy is to reduce fiscal deficit so
that its ill effects that pervade through the entire economy can
be avoided. The revised estimate for deficit for 2012-13 is
Rs.2024 billion or 8.8% of the GDP and we plan to reduce it to
Rs.1651 billion or by nearly 2.5 percentage points to 6.3% of the
GDP. We need to further reduce it but we have to do so
gradually and in the medium term we do plan to reduce it to 4%
of GDP.
(2) Raising Tax Revenues: I will lay down tax policy and specific
measures in the second part of my speech.
(3) Arresting Inflationary Pressures: The following measures will
help in arresting the inflationary pressures:
i. Reduction in deficit will have salutary effect on inflation.
Budget Speech 2013-14
7
ii. Regular price monitoring will be undertaken with a view to
ensure adequate supplies of all commodities. Extensive
networks of Juma and Itwar bazaars all across the
country will be established and wherever required imports
will be used to ward-off of domestic shortages.
iii. We will be using public savings and cheap foreign
borrowings to finance deficit and reduce the burden of
debt servicing. New domestic saving schemes will be
introduced aimed at enhancing public access to
government securities which are presently heavily
concentrated amongst the banks and given their high
spreads much of the benefits of government borrowings
are flowing to banks than to general depositors.
iv. Finally, we will be inducting professional managers in
debt management and taking advantage of numerous
opportunities to diversify our debts both domestic and
international.
v. `Elimination of borrowings from State Bank will be
pursued vigorously. However, I am at pain to point out
that the SBP Act, 1956, which was amended by this
parliament in 2012 imposing two important constraints on
the government borrowings from the State Bank, which is
basically printing of money, has been consistently
violated by the government. First, government could
borrow from SBP only for a maximum period of 3 months,
and at the end of each quarter those borrowings will have
to be retired. Second, the then existing stock of debt from
the State Bank, some Rs.1400 billion, was to be retired in
a period of 8 years. Rather than any retirement, neither
was any consideration given to the quarterly limit, nor
was the process to return the debt stock of Rs.1400
billion initiated. Having been increased by 64%, this stock
of debt now stands at Rs.2300 billion. We are now faced 
Budget Speech 2013-14
8
with this onerous responsibility to retire this debt in 6
years at the rate of nearly Rs.400 billion annually.
(4) Resolving the Energy Crisis: Not withstanding its enormity,
PML (N) government is fully committed to solving the energy
crisis facing the nation. We have chalked out a program and we
are inshallah putting it in operation forthwith. The plan includes
the following elements: First, I am pleased to announce that
Prime Minister Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif has taken an
historic decision to settle the entire circular debt in 60 days, so
that every available and economically viable source of power
could be brought on line. Second, as a result of this, we are
confident that the duration of loadshedding in the country will
begin to come down. Third, for this monumental effort to have
the desired effect on the continued viability of the sector, it is
imperative that we must do all that is needed to stop its
recurrence in the future. I urge all consumers to pay their bills,
for without recovery of cost no service can be provided
indefinitely. Fourth, the office of the Federal Adjuster will be
reorganized and strengthened so that it will ensure expeditious
recovery of arrears of electricity from the provincial
governments. Fifth, Prime Minister will soon announce a
comprehensive plan to incentivize and encourage further
investment in energy projects in Pakistan.
(5) Nandipur Project: I would also like to inform this House that a
highly economical power project, Nandipur for 425 MW, which
initially had a cost of Rs.23 billion was a victim of criminal
negligence and its imported machinery has remained stranded
for the last three years for want of clearance of certain
documents from government departments. Today its cost has
risen to Rs.57 billion. We have taken immediate cognizance of
this situation and are making necessary efforts to have the
documents released and obtain fresh approval from the
competent forums. As soon as these are in place in the next few
weeks, work on its construction will start immediately and 
Budget Speech 2013-14
9
inshallah shall be completed in 18 months. In the meanwhile, let
me make it abundantly clear that all those responsible for
inflicting this phenomenal loss on the nation shall be brought to
justice.
(6) Reducing un-targeted subsidies: As I noted earlier, we must
save country’s finances by relieving it from the burden of untargeted subsidies. We are conscious of the need for the weaker
sections of the population to be helped by the government.
Accordingly, any scheme of subsidy, whether in electricity, gas,
fertilizer, sugar and wheat must be targeted to reach to those
weaker segments. We therefore plan to rationalize the present
subsidies and discourage their indiscriminate use and evolve
targeting mechanism to ensure that deserving recipients should
benefit from them.
(7) Improving Balance of Payments: Our biggest woe at the
moment is near absence of foreign resources, critically needed
to sustain our balance of payments and provide additional
resources for development. Inshallah, we are giving an
economic vision and implementing it in this budget that will
significantly raise the confidence of our development partners.
We will soon sort our issues with IFIs and normal flows will
begin to flow in the country. More importantly, we will ensure a
transparent auction of 3-G licenses that will fetch a considerable
amount of foreign exchange. We will also strive to secure the
payment of $800 million from the Etisalat that is due for more
than 5 years. On the back of improved relations with IFIs, we will
return to international capital markets so that additional
resources can be mobilized from this source also. We also plan
to reinvigorate the privatization program that will also provide us
requisite foreign resource and be a catalyst for revival of foreign
investment in the country.
(8) Creating New Jobs: As I have already stated, much of the new
jobs will have to be created primarily in the private sector.
However, government will also play its part in this regard. In a 
Budget Speech 2013-14
10
short while I will give you more details of the public sector
development plan. For now, let me say that despite reducing
fiscal deficit we are raising the development expenditure from a
budgeted Rs.360 billion in the current year to Rs.540 billion
which is a significant increase of nearly 50%. The provincial
governments will make another investment of about Rs.615
billion taking the total public sector investment to Rs.1,155 billion
which is a healthy 4.4% of GDP. Clearly, there is room for
further increase in development spending but given the resource
constraint we have protected development expenditure and
increasing it also as compared to current expenditures. This
investment will create numerous jobs in various sectors of the
economy and spur other economic activities, which will create
further opportunities for gainful pursuits by our people.
(9) Raising Investment for Growth: Our biggest economic
challenge is to radically increase the level of investment in the
economy. I have already noted some of the steps we are taking
to reduce budget deficit, bring down inflation and pave the way
for a reduction in the interest rate, all of which will make room for
private investment.
(10) Reforming Public Sector Corporations: We are determined to
fully reform and restructure public sector corporations so that
their bleeding is stopped. At the outset, we have decided to
appoint professional managers in all public sector corporations
through a competitive and transparent process of recruitment.
All such corporations that can be profitably privatized will be put
to a credible process of privatization. Finally, where privatization
is not a possible option either a management contract will be
negotiated or fully independent management will be inducted to
run the corporations on pure professional grounds. Alongside,
full financial restructuring will be carried out to enable them to
run on sound commercial basis.
(11) Protecting the Poor: In its manifesto, the PML (N) has outlined
a detailed strategy for social protection. Indeed, I am pleased 
Budget Speech 2013-14
11
that in 2008 when PML (N) was part of the federal government
for a brief period, as Finance Minister I had designed a project of
income support fund. It was a program for supplementing the
income of poorest of families on totally apolitical basis with a
clear methodology for identifying the target population. However,
the purity of the program was compromised and it was also
politicized. We owe to our poor families that such a program
should continue with appropriate safeguards and should in fact
be extended to a larger portion of the target population. I am
pleased to announce that the Prime Minister Mian Nawaz Sharif
has decided that the Income Support Program will continue and
will also be expanded. From Rs.40 billion spent under the
program during the outgoing year, we will be raising its size to
Rs.75 billion, which is an increase of 87.5% in the program.
However, we will bring significant changes in its design and
build an explicit exit strategy for the recipients to ensure that this
support does not promote dependency rather it only helps them
break out from poverty and be able to find a job. I am also
pleased to announce that the amount of Rs.1000 per month
under the income support program is increased by 20% to
Rs.1200 per month.
Medium-term macroeconomic framework
Mr. Speaker
12. These are immediate challenges and our responses as we tackle them.
But our vision requires deeper reflection on the problems of our economy.
There has to be a long-term view of enhancing country’s productive capacity.
Accordingly, this budget is part of a medium term framework spanning 2013-
14 to 2015-16 and hence we have a larger time frame in mind while
formulating our economic policy. The key features of this framework are:
(1) GDP growth to gradually rise to 7% by FY 2015-16.
Budget Speech 2013-14
12
(2) Inflation will be maintained in single digit throughout the medium
term.
(3) Investment to GDP ratio will rise to 20% at the end of medium
term.
(4) Fiscal deficit to be brought to 4% of GDP by 2015-16.
(5) Pakistan’s foreign exchange reserves will be increased to more
than $20 billion at the end of medium term.
13. Evidently, these targets are ambitious but these are imperative for the
revival of the economy and quite consistent with its potential. Besides, we
have the determination to turn around the destiny of this nation and its for this
reason people have given us this mandate.
Development plan
Mr. Speaker
14. Let me now share some of the key initiatives that we are taking in the
development budget. I will keep my attention to only those sectors that will
contribute most to the economic development.
Water
15. Allah (SWT) has blessed Pakistan with one of the best water resources
in the world. We have also inherited an extensive network of irrigation canals,
water courses and barrages and our early leadership had the vision of
building such mega projects as Tarbela and Mangla that have enabled us to
support our agriculture, so central to our economic life. But unfortunately we
have failed to add to such critical projects or maintain these precious assets.
To meet the growing needs of water it is imperative that we build new
reservoirs and use every cusec of available water for development of energy.
16. It is this vision in view that is reflected in our development plan
allocation for the water sector. We are investing Rs.59 billion for the water 
Budget Speech 2013-14
13
sector projects that will include such projects as Katchi Canal (Dera Bugti and
Nasirabad), Rainee Canal (Ghotki and Sukkur), Kurram Tangi Dam (North
Waziristan), Extension of Pat Feeder Canal to Dera Bugti, Gomal Zam Dam
(South Waziristan), Ghabir Dam (Chakwal), completion of Mangla Dam
raising, lining of water courses in Sindh and Punjab, flood protection and
drainage schemes all over the country.
Power
Mr. Speaker
17. I need not underline the significance of the power sector in Pakistan
and what our people are suffering due to widespread shortages. Nothing has
consumed the time and energy of PML (N) leadership more than the problem
of energy and its immediate resolution. There are some urgent but durable
steps we are taking that I have announced in the budget to resolve the central
problem behind the energy crisis, namely the circular debt. However, our real
concern is to develop additional resources of energy so as to permanently
overcome the problem of shortages. The largest amount of resources,
accordingly, is being devoted to create more economical capacity in the
country. During the current year a sum of Rs.225 billion will be invested in this
sector of which Rs.107 billion will come from the PSDP and the remaining will
be mobilized by PEPCO-WAPDA through government support. The projects
included in the program include Neelum-Jehlum Hydro Power Project (1000
MW), Diamir-Bhasha Dam and Hydropower Project (4500 MW), Tarbela
Fourth Extension Project (1410 MW), Thar Coal Gasification Project (100
MW), Chashma Civil Nuclear Power project (600 MW), Two Karachi Nuclear
Coastal Power Projects (2200 MW) with Chinese assistance, Keyal Khawar
Hydro Project (122 MW), Allai Khawar Hydro Project (122 MW), Combined
Cycle Power Project at Nandipur (425 MW), Upgradation of Guddu Power
Project (747 MW gas-based), conversion of oil based power projects to coal
at Muzaffargarh and Jamshoro (3,120 MW) and numerous projects to improve
the transmission lines, grid-stations and distribution systems. 
Budget Speech 2013-14
14
18. It can be judged that we have a long-term plan to add cheap power to
the national grid and substitute the current dependence on fuel oil to cheaper
alternatives. The improvements in fuel mix will mean future tariffs will not be
rising as fast as they have been in the recent past.
Highways
Mr. Speaker
19. Since the time Mian Nawaz Sharif took the bold decision of building the
Islamabad-Lahore Motorway, no comparable project has been undertaken,
despite the fact that since its construction the size of the economy has
increased manifold and indigenous needs for connectivity are also multiplying.
It is with this urgency that we have carefully examined the entire portfolio of
national highways and have reprioritized it in accordance with the needs of
the country.
20. Both urban and rural populations need communications for their
economics. Farmers will not be able to get good prices for their produce nor
can urban producers be cost effective in the absence of communication links
that can efficiently transport their products to target markets. Indeed, we must
treat development of efficient communication as an important instrument of
poverty reduction, since a significant number of poor people are disconnected
with the places of economic opportunities and remain poor for lack of access
to such places.
21. It is amazing that Gwadar Port was constructed and no significant effort
was made to provide connectivity with the north even though nearly a decade
has passed since its completion. Coastal Highway was made to bring things
to Karachi, completely neutralizing the benefits that were supposed to accrue
with a new port at Gwadar.
22. We are according top most priority to connect the Gwadar Port to the
north by rapidly completing the various sections of Turbat-Basima-Ratodero 
Budget Speech 2013-14
15
and other smaller sections of M-8 so that the real benefits of the port will
begin to flow to the people. We will also accelerate the work on M-4
connecting Faisalabad to Khanewal and Multan. We plan to undertake a fresh
initiative to build M-9 linking Karachi-Hyderabad on Public Private Partnership
basis and we are confident that we will succeed in executing this project
within the shortest possible time. I would like to announce on this occasion
that the network of motorways which was conceived by Mian Muhammad
Nawaz Sharif will InshaAllah be completed during our tenure in office. This
network will guarantee vast expansion in domestic trade, significant reduction
in cost of transportation of goods from north to south, cheap transport for
people to move around in different parts of the country and increased
opportunities of tourism in the country.
23. Besides, the motorway network the Prime Minister has opened a
preliminary dialogue with the Chinese government for constructing a high
quality modern expressway linking Gwadar with Kashgar. This will be the
modern equivalent of ancient silk-route. This is a visionary project and will
unleash an historic progress in the region and provide a critical opening for
Pakistan with our northern neighborhood.
24. Apart from these strategic projects, we are investing in a large number
of national highways, bridges, rehabilitation and reconstruction of national
roads destroyed by the floods and regional roads for connectivity. A sum of
about Rs.63 billion has been kept in the budget for the road sector. Numerous
job opportunities will be created while undertaking the above projects.
Railways
Mr. Speaker
25. One of the most unfortunate examples of wasting our inherited
infrastructure at the time of Partition can be found in the state in which our
railway is found today. Once a most effective, extensive and efficient network 
Budget Speech 2013-14
16
of communication is not even a shade of its past. The speed with which the
railways’ significance in the transport sector has declined indicates that it is
headed for near extinction. This is simply unacceptable. The world over, rail
transport is regaining its lost glory as more investments are made and faster
trains are built for both passenger and goods transport. What is more, this
mode has been declared as environment friendly and hence it should be
preferable to vehicular traffic that is degrading our road infrastructure and
increases our dependence on fossil fuels.
26. Our railway is the victim of bad governance, low investments in
maintenance, induction of new locomotives, upgradation of rolling stocks,
replacement and modernization of primitive signaling system, efficient
communication network, track maintenance and doubling of the track on
mainline. Stagnant tariffs, declining market share in both passenger and
goods transport, rapidly falling revenues have all contributed to bringing
railway to a point where its pay and pension, of nearly Rs.34 billion, is paid
through a subsidy from the government.
27. An inherently commercial and profitable organization today stands in a
state of huge losses, countless stores of precious amounts of refused rails,
rolling stocks, locomotives and rebuilding factories suffering from low capacity
utilization. It is, however, not a poor organization, as it owns priceless lands,
the main artery of rail link and large number of branches connecting far flung
areas of the country, numerous bridges, countless buildings, factories, historic
railway stations and a very large cadre of technical and civil servants. They
are highly skilled, but presently they are demoralized and demotivated, as
they see no hope for their betterment tomorrow. The real problem, therefore,
in a sense, is not lack of resources, but their utterly inefficient utilization. All
this can be changed with leadership, vision, commitment and a plan, to be
faithfully implemented, that would aim at complete leveraging of railway
assets, infrastructure and improving incentives of employees to perform
better.
Budget Speech 2013-14
17
28. We are committed to revive Pakistan Railways and lay the foundation
for restoration of its past glory. Minister for Railways is developing a detailed
plan for the above purpose, but let me outline the basic features of the
agenda we shall pursue:
(1) Through an Act of the Parliament, Pakistan Railways will be
converted into a proper corporation, with due security of job and
terms and conditions of the employment of the existing
employees;
(2) The railway shall be managed by an independent Board to be
drawn from amongst the professionals from the fields of public
transport, engineering, management, accountancy, finance, law
and public administration;
(3) With the approval of the Board and the Federal Government,
railway administration will design a policy for public private
partnerships for the profitable utilization of all railway assets.
(4) Development funding for railway will be gradually increased for
locomotives, doubling of track, addition to rolling stocks,
rehabilitation of signaling system and modernization of
communication links. Next we are allocating Rs.31 billion for
different projects of railway compared to the revised estimate of
Rs.20 billion for 2012-13;
(5) Feasibility studies will be completed for linking Pakistan through
rail from Gwadar to Afghanistan, on one side, and Gwadar to
China, on the other;
(6) Karachi Circular Railway project will be expedited through the
help of Government of Japan;
Human Development
Mr. Speaker
29. The most precious resources of any nation are their people. Indeed, it
is said that the real development is embodied in the people, no matter how 
Budget Speech 2013-14
18
much of its outer manifestation is reflected in physical developments.
Accordingly, we must treat expenditures on human development as
investments as they lay the foundation of future growth at an accelerated
pace.
30. Incidentally, the three main subjects of human development, namely
education, health and population welfare have been devolved to the provinces
under the 18th Constitutional Amendment. However, the responsibility for
higher education, regulatory responsibilities and international coordination
remain with the federal government. I would like to mention the following.
Initiatives that will be undertaken for the promotion of this sector:
(1) A sizeable allocation of Rs.18 billion has been made for the
Higher Education Commission, which will support development
plans of different universities all over the country. It may be
noted that on the current side also a hefty allocation of Rs.39
billion is made for HEC. Thus a combined outlay of Rs.57 billion
will be made for higher education.
(2) The enrollment in higher education will increase from 1.08
million students in 2012-13 to 1.23 million students in 2013-14,
showing an increase of 14% in the population of students
pursuing higher education;
(3) The number of foreign scholarships will rise to 6,249 from 4,249,
showing an increase of 2000 scholarships during 2013-14.
(4) Federal Government, despite devolution, is continuing to fund a
number of national health initiatives. This year we are allocating
nearly Rs.21 billion for these programs.
(5) The programs include Expanded Program of Immunization
(EPI), National Maternal Neonatal and Child Health Program,
National Program for Family Planning and Primary Healthcare
and several national programs for prevention and control of
important diseases such as blindness, TB, Hepatitis and AVN
Influenza. 
Budget Speech 2013-14
19
(6) Most importantly, funding for the provincial programs for
population welfare will continue to be provided by the federal
government. This year an allocation of nearly Rs.8 billion is
made for this purpose.
Industry and Regional Trade
Mr. Speaker
31. It is now well known that over the last five years our industry has been
suffering from gross neglect of policymakers, lack of institutional support,
energy bottlenecks, absence of adequate credit facilities, and poor state of
infrastructure, poor governance and burdensome regulatory regimes across
both provincial and federal governments. These are very serious impediments
and not surprisingly, as a consequence, investment has declined sharply in
the country during the last five years and industrial growth has averaged a
paltry 1.8 percent. With this growth rate, we cannot possibly hope to attain the
overall growth rate of 7 percent that we have targeted to achieve by the last
year of our medium term budgetary framework 2015-16.
32. We are conscious of the centrality of the manufacturing sector in the
overall socioeconomic development of Pakistan and its potential to create
jobs for our youth. Our plans will remain unrealistic unless we are able to
revive the industrial sector. I would like to announce the following measures
that we will undertake in the near future to accelerate industrial development
in the country:
(1) The policy of developing Export Promotion Zones with
comprehensive incentive packages, which we had earlier
supported with enthusiasm, will be reviewed and necessary
amendments made to make it more attractive.
(2) In collaboration with the provincial governments new industrial
estates will be established throughout Pakistan, fully equipped 
Budget Speech 2013-14
20
to provide all the required infrastructure for industrial
undertakings.
(3) Even while in Opposition, we played a pivotal role in introducing
the Special Economic Zones Act 2012. This legislation required
earnest commitment and serious effort to bear fruit. Not much
has been done to put this Act in operation. We will now bring
this legislation to fruition by implementing it in letter and spirit,
backed by a strong public policy commitment.
(4) We have a comprehensive plan to develop the Gwadar Special
Economic Zone, which will be watershed for the economy of not
just Balochistan, but of the whole country. The Zone will be
linked with major economic centers in Pakistan as well as
neighboring countries. Through Gwadar, we hope to make
Pakistan a regional center and conduit of international trade,
beginning from China and Central Asia to the last limits of the
West. The potential of transformation of Pakistan becoming a
regional gateway of international trade is limitless.
(5) We will earnestly develop strong trade relationships with all our
neighbors, primarily to expand markets for industries and to
improve the regional terms of trade.
(6) State institutions will be strengthened to provide a healthy,
reliable, and conducive economic environment for the growth of
trade, commerce and industry.
(7) With improved macroeconomic framework, more credit will be
available for the private sector investment.
(8) The revival of privatization program will create more
opportunities for the private sector to invest and manage newer
assets that were previously run in the public sector.
Budget Speech 2013-14
21
Housing
Mr. Speaker
33. A ‘roof over the head’ is the right of every Pakistani. Unfortunately, the
housing gap is rising ever so fast in the country. While the private sector land
developers have catered for the needs of the middle and upper-middle
classes, nothing has been done to provide decent housing for the low and
lower-middle classes. With no prospect of profitmaking, it is quite
understandable that the private sector remained oblivious to the needs of
these otherwise very important societal groups. During our last tenure, we
introduced housing schemes for the poorest of poor throughout the country,
especially in the rural and semi-urban areas. Under these schemes, land was
provided free of cost. Although Ministry of Housing and Works is developing
the detailed plan, I would like to share the main features of the policy on
provision of housing to the poor:
(1) Wherever feasible, 3-Marla housing schemes will developed on
government land for the homeless, to whom plots will be given
free of cost
(2) At least 1,000 clusters of 500 houses each will be developed for
low-income families through public private partnerships
(3) To ensure cost-effective access to credit for housing,
government will be picking up a portion of the financing cost on
behalf of the borrower. A provision of Rs.3.5 billion is kept in the
budget for this purpose;
(4) Schemes on the model of Ashiyana Housing Scheme will also
be developed in which the government will provide opportunities
to low income families to own their house on payment of easy
installments.
Budget Speech 2013-14
22
Budget Estimates
Mr. Speaker,
34. Let me place before the House the estimates of revenues and
expenditures for the next fiscal year.
35. For 2013-14, the gross revenue receipts of the federal government are
estimated at Rs.3,420 billion compared to the revised figures of Rs.2,837
billion for 2012-13, showing an increase of about 21%. This is remarkable
revenue effort we are projecting and I shall share more details of this in Part-II
of my speech.
36. The share of the provinces out of this amount will be Rs.1,502 billion
compared to Rs.1,221 billion outgoing year, and showing an increase of about
23%. Net resources left with the federal government will be Rs.1,918 billion
compared to the revised estimates of Rs.1,616 billion for outgoing year,
showing an increase of about 19%. The level of transfers to the provinces is
historic. We are happy to share this larger revenue as under the new
constitutional arrangements provincial responsibilities, particular relating to
social sectors have been significantly enhanced. We are sure that higher
resource transfer will enable them to bring the critical social services and law
and order facilities to the doorstep of our people.
37. Total expenditure for 2013-14 is budgeted at Rs.3,591 billion compared
to the revised estimates of Rs.3,577 billion for 2012-13, showing a negligible
increase. This is the first indication of an austere budget in line with the
imperatives of the economy. The current budget is estimated at Rs.2,829
billion for 2013-14 against a revised estimate of Rs.2,720 billion for 2012-13,
showing an increase of 4%. However, keeping in view the development
needs, investment requirements of the country and urgency of creating
additional job opportunities, we have provided adequate development
resources. Against a budgeted estimate of Rs.360 billion for PSDP, we have
budgeted it at Rs.540 billion showing an increase of nearly 50%.
Budget Speech 2013-14
23
38. The federal deficit is projected at Rs.1,674 billion for 2013-14
compared to the revised estimate of Rs.1,962 billion for outgoing year. By
requiring a small surplus of Rs.23 billion from the provinces, compared to a
revised deficit of Rs.62 billion outgoing year, we have projected an overall
fiscal deficit of Rs.1,651 billion for 2013-14 compared to the revised estimate
of Rs.2024 billion outgoing year. This gives deficit to GDP ratio of 6.3% for
2013-14 compared to an alarmingly large deficit of 8.8% incurred outgoing
year.
Mr. Speaker
39. It is evident that our government is laying the foundation of a sound
economy, which is the most important challenge our country is facing. We
have not gone for populism but have responded to the imperative of the
situation in hand. An adjustment of nearly 2.5% is not a mean achievement
and we are confident that we will deliver it.
Budget Speech 2013-14
24
PART-II
Mr. Speaker,
40. Allow me to start Part II of my speech, which relates to taxation
proposals.
41. As a nation, we need to make appropriate decisions so that Pakistan
can live within its own means, bring down deficit to reasonable limit and
mobilize requisite resources for development.
42. The PML (N) Government seeks to encourage overall economic activity
in the country and create an conducive environment which facilitates genuine
investors and business. As we all know, when business flourishes,
employment opportunities are created, investment flows into the country and
ultimately, there is peace and prosperity.
Mr.Speaker,
43. To achieve these objectives, the Government has decided not to put
additional burdens on those people who are already paying their due share of
tax, but to make efforts to ensure that those who are not paying anything
should be forced to contribute something to the national exchequer. The
revival of national economy is the main focus of the PML (N) government.
This requires fundamental and structural reforms in the area of Taxation.
Mr.Speaker,
44. The earlier PML (N) government raised Tax to GDP ratio to 13%, which
was the result of simplification of tax laws, making taxes broad based,
plugging loopholes in the system and holding tax machinery more
accountable. The reform process was halted with the illegal and arbitrary
dismissal of the PML (N) government and as a result, the Tax to GDP ratio
declined gradually and is presently at alarming rate of 9%. The focus of the 
Budget Speech 2013-14
25
budget 2013-14 is improvement in Tax to GDP ratio finally reaching to 15% by
2018.
Mr. Speaker,
45. The immense economic challenges being faced by the country require
a smooth flow of revenue generated through our own resources, reducing
reliance on aid and foreign loans. It is of utmost importance that we become
self reliant. The country is going through a severe energy crisis. Mobilization
of adequate resources is required to address this issue so that suffering of our
people are mitigated.
Mr.Speaker,
46. The broad themes of our government’s taxation policy are (i) taxing
those who are not paying any tax, (ii) enhancing efficiency of the tax
machinery, (iii) removing anomalies and distortions in the tax system, (iv)
simplifying the tax procedures, (v) broadening of the tax base, (vi)
rationalization of tax rates and exemptions, (vii) encouraging corporatization
and documentation (viii) taxpayers facilitation and (ix) to eradicate
maladministration and corruption in F.B.R.
Mr.Speaker,
47. A fair and equitable tax system lays more emphasis on direct taxes, so
that the affluent classes of society pay more. Unfortunately, in our taxation
system, indirect taxes have a major share, leading to tax burden on common
man. This year, a paradigm change has been made in proposing tax
measures, as the overwhelming revenue proposals relate to direct taxes. 
Budget Speech 2013-14
26
Income Tax:
Mr. Speaker,
Relief Measures
48. A number of relief measures are being proposed under the Income Tax
Ordinance through this Finance Bill.
49. These measures are highlighted below:
(1) With effect from fiscal year 2014-15, the maximum corporate
tax rate will be reduced by 1% annually to coming down to
30% from the present 35%. This will promote a culture of
corporatization in the country;
(2) The income tax exemption of 5 years for investments made in
Special Economic Zones will be increased to 10 years. This
will be helpful in increasing investments in such zones;
(3) The facility of exemption certificate for the manufacturers on
import of raw material was withdrawn a few years back which
adversely affected the cash flow and resulted in
overpayments and creation of refunds. In order to facilitate
the manufacturing sector, facility of exemption certificate on
import of raw material is being reintroduced subject to
payment of tax liability determined for any of the preceding
two years, which is higher.
(4) Currently goods transport vehicles are subjected to minimum
tax on services and income tax paid at the time of payment of
provincial motor vehicle tax, which is final tax. This renders
the transport sector to double taxation, which is unjustifiable.
For the facilitation of the transport sector, Income Tax paid
along with provincial motor vehicle tax is being made
adjustable.
(5) The facility of carry forward of Unadjusted Minimum Tax was
restricted to the corporate sector which was discriminatory to 
Budget Speech 2013-14
27
the non-corporate sector. In order to provide a level playing
field to all taxpayers, this facility is also being extended to
Individuals and AOPs.
(6) Likewise, reduction in Minimum Tax was restricted to the
distributors of cigarettes in corporate sector. Being
discriminatory to small taxpayers working in the status of
AOPs and Individuals of this sector, reduced rate of minimum
tax is also being extended to the individuals and AOPs.
Broadening of Income Tax
50. It is well known that our tax base is extremely narrow. The most
important need of tax reforms is to broaden the net as widely as possible to
bring in all those people who have the ability to pay taxes. It is equally
desirable that those who are already in the net should face a rational,
predictable and simple regime for tax compliance. For all these objectives
following measures are being adopted:
(1) Huge expenses are incurred on functions such as marriages
etc. but remain un-documented, which restricts a proper
analysis of income earnings. In order to document such
expenses an adjustable withholding tax is being introduced
which the Hotels/Clubs/Marriage Halls/Restaurants etc. shall
collect from persons arranging the functions. Being an
adjustable tax, people shall be encouraged to file income tax
returns, which shall serve the purpose of broadening of tax
base;
(2) To align income tax and sales tax and to discourage fake
invoices, it is proposed that all persons registered under the
sales tax law shall be made withholding agents for Income
Tax purpose on payments on account of purchases, services
and contracts;
(3) To ensure that the taxpayers do not abuse the facilities and
reliefs provided in the Income Tax Law to avoid proper 
Budget Speech 2013-14
28
taxation by consistently declaring losses and contribute to the
exchequer equitably, the rate of minimum tax shall be
enhanced from 0.5% to 1%.
(4) The construction sector contributes Rs.1 billion to the national
exchequer, which is not proportionate to its potential. Its
taxation is normally spread over multiple years depending
upon the period of construction. In order to simplify taxation of
construction sector minimum tax on builders and developers
is proposed. The tax shall be paid at a the rate of Rs.50 per
sq. ft. of the constructed area; or Rs.100 per square yard of
the developed land, as the case may be.
(5) The rates of tax on salary introduced last year overburdened
the middle-income group. This anomaly has been corrected
through this Finance Bill by rationalizing the rates of tax on
salaries in way that each income group pays tax according to
its capacity.
(6) Rate of tax on Business individuals and AOPs shall be
rationalized with the addition of two new slabs. This will
gradually increase the rate from current maximum of 25% for
income exceeding Rs.2.5 million to 35% for income above
Rs.6 million.
(7) To encourage corporatization, separate rates of WHT for noncorporate taxpayers i.e. commercial imports, contracts,
supplies and services are being proposed.
(8) New adjustable withholding tax is being proposed for foreignbased films and dramas to make them competitive with the
local film industry.
(9) To bring dealers/Arhtis of commodities in tax net, WHT on the
basis of registration category is being introduced. Market
committees shall collect this adjustable tax from such dealers.
(10) To tax affluent class on the basis of its expenses, it is
proposed that adjustable withholding tax may be introduced
@ 5% on annual fee of Rs.200,000 paid to an educational
institution.
Budget Speech 2013-14
29
(11) Traders are not contributing to the tax revenue in keeping with
their share in GDP. Adjustable withholding tax is accordingly
proposed to be collected from wholesalers and retailers in
specified sectors @ 0.1% and 0.5%. The rate of tax to be
collected from wholesalers and dealers is being reduced to
0.1% from 0.5%. The manufacturers, distributors and
commercial importers shall collect this tax.
(12) Agriculture sector enjoys exemption from payment of federal
tax but this facility has been misused as untaxed non
agriculture income is concealed in the garb of agriculture
income. In order to check the misuse of law, it is proposed
that credit of agricultural income shall be given only if
provincial income tax on such income has been paid. It will
also facilitate in enhancing the revenue of Provinces from
agricultural income.
(13) The law for obtaining information from bank regarding its
customers is being aligned with international practices. The
objective is to strengthen the National data warehouse at FBR
for tax base broadening.
(14) In order to expand the tax base, it is decided to utilize data
collected by the Federal Board of Revenue and NADRA in a
systematic manner. In this regard profiling of 500,000 persons
identified on the basis of financial transactions traced shall be
carried out. Besides, display of NTN at business premises is
also being made mandatory to broaden the tax net. These
measures will increase out reach of the department and
promote the culture of voluntary compliance.
Introduction of Income Support Levy Act
Mr. Speaker,
51. It is incumbent on all of us who are blessed with exceptional favors
from Allah (SWT) to contribute to the welfare of those not so fortunate. Many 
Budget Speech 2013-14
30
of us who may have earned our assets while working abroad have negligible
tax liabilities under the existing laws and double taxation treaties. Yet we must
share the burden of helping our weaker segments of population. In order to
mobilize additional resources for enhancing the income support program for
the poorest families in Pakistan, it is proposed to impose a small levy on such
persons. This levy shall apply on net moveable assets of persons on a given
date @ of 0.5%. The receipts under this head will be credited to income
support program of the government. Voluntary contributions will be also be
solicited to mobilize additional resources. Let me admit that I shall be amongst
the first ones who will be hit by this levy. According to my estimation, I will
have to pay an additional Rs.2.5 million on this count this year, but I will be
too happy to make this contribution for the welfare of our poor people.
Sales Tax and Excise Duty
Mr. Speaker,
52. Several measures have been proposed for broadening the bases of
sales tax and excise duties for bringing into the tax net those who have
remained outside so far. Our policy is that persons who remain unregistered
will have to bear a greater burden than those who are registered. These
measures are highlighted below.
(1) An additional amount of sales tax of 5% is being imposed
through electricity and gas bills of those having commercial
or industrial connections but remain unregistered. Once they
get registered, it will no longer apply to them.
(2) All taxable supplies made to unregistered persons will
include 2% further tax, for encouraging registration. Again,
once they get registered, they will no longer have to bear
this charge.
(3) The sales tax withholding agents will now withhold the full
amount of sales tax on purchases made from such
unregistered persons. 
Budget Speech 2013-14
31
(4) Certain important measures are being initiated to enhance
the efficiency of the tax machinery and increase its
enforcement capacity. These measures are explained here.
(5) To reduce leakage in sectors prone to evasion, the
government is planning to initiate electronic monitoring of
production processes through video links, tax stamps and
labels, electronic tracking, etc. Effective monitoring without
human intervention will help introduce a transparent,
automatic, and error-free way to ensure proper payment of
taxes by these sectors.
(6) FBR has already developed a sophisticated computerized
system, called CREST, which has recently helped to detect
and recover billions of rupees from the textile sector. This
system will be enhanced and expanded, so that leakages of
revenue in other sectors can also be detected and
recovered.
(7) It is also proposed to introduce a simplified and centralized
mechanism to block illegal refunds and input tax
adjustments, to stop fake and flying invoices, and to prevent
bogus registered persons from committing tax frauds.
(8) To ensure proper monitoring of taxable activities, the
registration of registered persons will be placed in the
jurisdiction where its business premises are located.
(9) In view of serious resource constraint it is imperative that
additional resources should be mobilized immediately.
Accordingly, it is proposed to raise the standard rate of sales
tax from 16% to 17%.
(10) Supplies made under international tenders used to be zerorated, but were made exempt last year to stop creation of
refunds and associated malpractices. However, this
measure created a disadvantage for local competitors, as
they could no longer claim input tax adjustment. To create a
level playing field for both local and foreign competitors for
international tenders, it has been decided to remove the 
Budget Speech 2013-14
32
disparity and place both local and foreign competitors under
the same standard tax regime.
(11) Zero-rating of sales tax on local supplies tends to create
distortions and promotes malpractices. But since ordinary
people also use many of these zero-rated items, sales tax is
not being imposed on them and they are being exempted
from sales tax.
(12) It has been decided to expand the list of items in the Third
Schedule to the Sales Tax Act. The measures will not only
require manufacturers and importers to print retail prices on
consumer goods, but also enable the government to capture
the tax involved till the retail stage instead of the benefit
going to unregistered wholesalers and retailers.
(13) The five export-oriented sectors were enjoying zero-rating
on local supplies over the past several years, which has
recently been changed to a reduced rate regime. However,
even expensive imported goods like branded clothes,
leather bags, and sports goods are enjoying the reduced
rate of 2%. Some items enjoying the reduced rates have
multi-purpose use in other industries, which creates
distortions. To remove these problems, finished goods and
items having multi-purpose use are being taken out of the
reduced rate regime.
(14) In 2010, due to the prevailing situation, a general exemption
of duties and taxes was extended to the tribal areas and
some districts of Khyber Pakhtoonkhwa. These were
supposed to be time-bound exemptions, and the income tax
exemption has already expired. However, the notifications
for sales tax and federal excise exemptions did not have any
expiry clause. The continued exemption is creating a
distortion and difficulties for businesses in other regions. It
is, therefore, proposed to be withdrawn.
(15) In case of federal excise, manufacturers of edible oil and
ghee complained of distortion, as those using locally 
Budget Speech 2013-14
33
produced oil or imported oilseeds were not paying any tax.
To remove this anomaly, locally produced oil and imported
oilseed are being subjected to the similar tax regime as
imported edible oil.
(16) Presently, financial services offered by banking and nonbanking sectors are subject to federal excise duty. There is
no duty if other persons provide the same services. To
remove this disparity, it is proposed that federal excise duty
at the same rate may be imposed on all such financial
services.
(17) At present, imported edible oil is subject to tax. However,
canola seed is being freely imported. This is not only a
disparity but also hurts the local oil seed production. To
remove this disparity, it has been decided to impose
beginning from China and Central Asia to the last limits of
the West.
(18) The Federal excise duty on cigarettes is simplified and restructured, from three slabs based on a composite formula,
to two slabs based on a specific rate.
(19) It is proposed to allow the aerated beverage industry to pay
tax on capacity or fixed basis. It would not only facilitate
them, but would help them contribute a handsome additional
amount to the exchequer. It would eliminate corruption and
make the system transparent and clear. It will also
encourage the industry to expand. The detailed notification
for implementing the new regime will be issued shortly.
Customs:
Mr. Speaker,
53. Let me say that Pakistan’s import regime over the decades has
become fraught with a complex system of discriminatory exemptions and
concessions. Every year national exchequer suffers a cost of Rs. 100 billion 
Budget Speech 2013-14
34
on account of these exemptions. In today’s world of free trade and level
playing field this cannot go on. We have to adopt a simple tax and tariff
structure by abolishing the culture of SROs.
54. In order to resolve this long protracted issue, a high level committee
headed by Chairman, FBR is being constituted. The committee will examine
and finalize its report after consulting all the stakeholders and submit its
recommendations to the ECC for tariff rationalization and minimization of
concessionary regime.
55. Power shortage has become a chronic problem for the whole country.
While major initiatives are being taken to address the power generation and
supply situation, a major shift towards the use of renewable energy resources
is also a need of the time. In this context various measures are being
included in the current budget to encourage use of alternate energy resources
by simplifying the procedure for duty free import of solar and wind energy
machinery and equipment. At the same time, duty on energy saving devices
like energy saving tubes, solar water pumps etc. is also being exempted.
56. Despite prevailing economic situation, every possible effort is being
made to provide some respite to the suffering poor of Pakistan. Availability of
clean water is fundamental right of every Pakistani. In order to address the
spread of water borne diseases through use of filtered water, rate of customs
duties on water filtration equipment is being reduced.
57. Use of imported POL products as a major source of energy has not
only led to high import bill, but has also created a negative environmental
impact. Therefore, use of alternate energy efficient Hybrid Electric Vehicles
(HEVs) needs to be encouraged. It is, therefore, proposed that HEVs up to
1200cc will be exempt from duties and other taxes. From 1201cc to 1800cc
50% relief from duties and other taxes will be provided and from 1801cc to
2500cc, 25% relief is proposed. No relief will be available for vehicles beyond
2500cc.
Budget Speech 2013-14
35
58. Betel nuts and betel leaves are injurious to health. In order to
discourage their consumption, custom duty on both these items shall be
increased.
Mr. Speaker
59. The proposed tax measures are the most important need of the
economy. It will help us in reducing fiscal deficit and also reduce our
dependence on external resources. Thus this is an important move toward
achieving self-reliance.
Budget Speech 2013-14
36
PART-III
New Programs for Youth
Mr. Speaker
60. One of the key messages Prime Minister had given during election
campaign was his commitment to toward the welfare of our youth. Amongst all
sections of our population it is our youth that must not be struck despair and
despondency. It is in fulfillment of his promises with the youth that following
new programs will be launched in next year’s budget:
(1) Prime Minister’s Youth Training Program: Amongst the
youth, the most vulnerable group are those who have completed
a 16-year degree program but have not been able to find a
decent job, mostly for lack of appropriate experience and
training. It is the most cherished desire of the Prime Minister that
the government must handhold this group of highly educated
youth to inspire confidence and assurance in their lives.
Accordingly, he has directed that a comprehensive scheme be
developed for such youth in government offices, corporations,
bodies and authorities at all levels. All those completing a 16-
year degree program and below the age of 25 years will be
eligible for selection under the scheme. A one-year training
program will be designed for these graduates during which they
will be entitled for a stipend of Rs.10,000 per month. Ministry of
Education, Training and Standards for Higher Education will
administer the scheme and each applicant will apply on-line and
his/her degrees will be verified also on-line by HEC. I am
confident that this scheme will provide a useful training to
qualified youth nearer their homes and will enable them to fare
better in the job market.
(2) Prime Minister’s Youth Skills Development Program: Under
this program 25,000 young persons up to the age of 25 and will
minimum qualification of middle, will be imparted training in a 
Budget Speech 2013-14
37
number of trades across the country. National Vocational and
Technical Training Commission (NAVTTC) will manage the
program in collaboration with provincial TEVTA authorities. Six
months training will be given for which fee will be paid by the
government. Emphasis will be placed on such trades as are in
demand abroad or will enable the graduates to become selfemployed.
(3) Small Business Loans Scheme: With a view to enable our
youth to start their own business, small business loans will be
made available through the banking system. Under the scheme
loans ranging from Rs.100,000 to Rs.2,000,000 will be available
at a mark-up cost of 8%. The remaining cost will be borne by the
Government. In the first year of the scheme, 50,000 loans will be
offered. The scheme will be strengthened in the light of
experience gained in first year of operation.
(4) Prime Minister’s Scheme for Provision of Laptop: To
promote access to information and communication technology it
has been decided that provision of a laptop for distinguished
student pursuing higher education should be made. All students
pursuing a degree program from one of the HEC recognized
universities or institutions and meeting merit criteria to be
developed by HEC would be eligible to get a laptop. HEC will
announce the details of the scheme shortly.
(5) Fee Reimbursement Scheme for Less Developed Areas:
Under an existing scheme bright students from less developed
areas are provided tuition fee support while pursuing higher
education at Master’s and Doctorate levels. Presently, it is
available to students from Balochistan, FATA, Gilgit-Baltistan.
There is no reason why this support should not be expended to
other less developed areas such as those of Interior Sindh and
Multan, Bahawalpur and D.G. Khan Divisions of South Punjab,
which are equally less developed. Accordingly, students from
these areas pursuing higher education on merit will also be
eligible for tuition fee support.
Budget Speech 2013-14
38
(6) Prime Minister’s Micro Finance Scheme: To enable our men
and women to undertake micro enterprise activities, it is decided
to allocate Rs.5 billion to launch a scheme of Qarz-e-Hassana
(loans without mark-up). These will be made available through
selected micro finance providers including Akhuwat, NRSP and
Provincial RSPs. Fifty percent of the beneficiaries of this
scheme will be women.
(7) Prime Minister’s Housing Finance Scheme: Under this
scheme, a mortgage facility of Rs. 1.5 million to Rs. 5.0 million
will be offered at a mark-up rate of 8%. The remaining cost will
be borne by the government. Fifty thousand people will benefit
from this scheme.
Mr. Speaker
Good governance
Public Works Programs for Parliamentarians
61. Before I close budgetary proposals, let me announce a historic
decision taken by Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif. This relates to the public
works programs undertaken on the recommendations of the parliamentarians.
There were two programs for this purpose PWP-I and PWP-II. The PWP-I
was well structured and was based on equal amount for all parliamentarians
with an allocation of Rs.5 billion. This program is being retained. However, the
other program had no structure and depended on the discretion of the Prime
Minister. Rs.22 billion were budgeted for this programme at the beginning of
the current financial year, which was revised upwards to Rs.47, and finally the
year is ending with an expenditure of Rs.42 billion. This program will be
stopped forthwith.
Budget Speech 2013-14
39
Mr. Speaker
62. This one decision is the forerunner of the new style of governance the
Prime Minister will bring to the job to move Pakistan ahead with dignity and
honor.
Secret Service Expenditures
63. In recent days the nation has also come to know that in the name of
secret service expenditures a long list of ministries and departments have
been incurring such expenditures, which are excluded from the requirement of
audit. This exclusion from audit was meant for such expenditures incurred by
agencies connected with the national security. We have taken immediate
cognizance of this matter and yesterday Ministry of Finance has issued
necessary instructions for immediate ceasing of such of such expenditures
and return of unspent balances. Simultaneously, the allocations for the next
year have been cancelled. Henceforth, such secret service expenditures will
be made only be agencies connected with national security. Appropriate
amendment in law and rules is being made for this purpose.
Discouraging VVIP Culture
64. In 1997, the Prime Minister Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif had
withdrawn the exemption given to VVIPs for duty and tax-free import of luxury
vehicles for personal use. Consequently, in the Import Policy Order 1998,
which I had announced, the Entry No 1.15 of the Import-Export Procedure
was deleted that allowed imports of such vehicles. However, unfortunately
such an exemption was accorded in violation of this provision in 2005. Our
government would like to reiterate that this ban on duty and tax-free vehicles
will continue without exception.
Budget Speech 2013-14
40
Austerity Measures
65. We are passing through difficult times and its incumbent on us that we
reduce our expenditures as much as possible. For this purpose, we have
decided to take the following austerity measures to be applicable in the new
fiscal year:
(1) The most pressing need of the government is to consolidate its
unwieldy size. Prime Minister has decided not to use the full
strength of the Cabinet that is provided in the Constitution, which
are 49.
(2) To conserve precious resources, the Prime Minister has decided
to start the exercise from his own Office. His office will be lean
and mean. Furthermore, he is also applying significant cuts to
the budgetary allocations for his office. From the budget of
Prime Minister’s Office, against a revised expenditure of Rs.725
million during 2012-13, the budget estimate for 2013-14 is only
Rs.396 million showing a decrease of 45%. From the budget of
Prime Minister House, excluding salaries and allowances, 44%
budget has been cut.
(3) Other than the obligatory expenditures of debt servicing,
defense, pay and allowances of civil servants and grants, there
will be a 30% cut on all other expenditures in accordance with
the announcement of the Prime Minister. This will save Rs.40
billion;
(4) With the exception of operational vehicles of law enforcing
agencies and critical development projects, no car will be
purchased;
(5) The discretionary grant of federal ministers is removed.
Budget Speech 2013-14
41
Relief measures for retired government employees
66. Despite austerity drive we are mindful of the difficulties being faced by
retired government employees. To mitigate their difficulties it has been
decided to increase pensions by 10% from July 1, 2013, with the additional
relief to low pensioners, whose minimum pension is increased from Rs.3000
to Rs.5000.
Ramzan Package
67. The Holy month of Ramzan is just around the corner. To ease the
burden on our people, we are designing a comprehensive plan for providing
relief during this month by significant reduction in prices of major kitchen items
through the Utility Stores Corporation. An amount of Rs.2 billion has been
allocated in the budget for this purpose. These items include: sugar, flour,
rice, ghee, oil, daal channa, baisan, dates, squashes and syrups, milk, tea
and spices.
Concluding Remarks
Mr. Speaker,
68. As I said at the beginning, we have inherited a broken economy but we
are determined to face the challenge of its reconstruction squarely. There is
no evasive action that we plan to undertake neither is we burying our heads in
the sand. Lofty ideals are never achieved by turning your back on the
adversities encountered on the way. Under the circumstances, the nation
should appreciate that the path we have selected is tortuous but once
traversed, it will lead the nation to prosperity and progress that is consistent
and in line with the possibilities and potentialities possessed by us.
69. This is the lesson we can learn from our Great Quide Muhammad Ali
Jinnah, who under a serious medical condition chose to travel to Dhaka to 
Budget Speech 2013-14
42
quell a disenchantment facing the nascent state. While concluding a long but
highly inspiring speech before one the most largely attended public meetings
on 21 March 1948, the Quid said, and I quote:
Finally, let me appeal to you – keep together, put up with
inconveniences, sufferings and sacrifices, for the collective good
of our people. No amount of trouble, no amount of hard work or
sacrifice contribution is enough for the collective good of your
nation and state. It is in that way, that you will build a Pakistan
as the fifth largest state in the world, not only in population as it
is but also in strength, so that it will command the respect of all
the other nations of the world.
70. Curiously, I find that Allama Muhammad Iqbal, who first conceived the
idea of Pakistan, had a similar message for us we he formulated this powerful
and apt description of our potentialities:
Mr. Speaker,
71. Let’s start our journey on the road identified by Quid-e-Azam and
Allama Iqbal the two great leaders of Pakistan movement. Allah (SWT) will be
our Guide and Supporter.