BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 1 of 71
Budget Speech 2017-18
Bismillahir-Rehmanir-Rahim
PART-I
Mr. Speaker,
1. Today I present the fifth consecutive budget of the PML(N) government with
Allah’s (SW) blessings and mercy.
Mr. Speaker,
2. It is for the first time that a fifth consecutive budget is being presented by the
same Prime Minister and Finance Minister. This is reflection of strengthening of
democracy for which the entire nation can feel proud. And it is with great humility that
I thank Allah (SW) that He has given this opportunity to an ordinary person like me.
3. Before I go into the details of the next financial year’s budget, I would like to
give a brief resume of the distance that we have traversed in the last four years. It
would not be an exaggeration on my part to say that in June 2013 Pakistan was on
the brink of default on its financial commitments. Our Forex reserves were at an
historic low covering only two weeks’ worth of imports. Large payments were falling
due and what to say of the commercial banks even the multi-lateral development
partners were shy of undertaking any new business with Pakistan. The FBR
revenues had grown only by 3.38% for that year, expenditure was high and the result
was a fiscal deficit of over 8% of GDP. Energy outages were pandemic, the load-
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 2 of 71
shedding hours in a day were longer than those in which electricity was available.
Load shedding in cities was for 12 to 14 hours while in villages was 16 to 18 hours.
The writing on the wall was obvious. From macroeconomic perspective, Pakistan’s
economy was declared as unstable internationally.
4. Today Pakistan is on the cusp of a high growth trajectory. Our GDP has
grown this year by 5.3% which is a 10-year high. Foreign exchange reserves are at a
comfortable level, sufficient to cover about 4 months of imports; tax revenues have
increased by 81% over the last four years translating into an average annual
increase of 20%; since 2013 credit to private sector has increased by over five times;
fiscal deficit will be around 4.2 percent; there has been over 40% increase in imports
of capital goods this year; gas availability has improved, and load-shedding for
industry has been eliminated and substantially reduced for commercial and domestic
sectors - Inshallah next year will be the year of complete elimination of load
shedding.
5. The writing on the wall is obvious even today - only the message has
changed. Today globally credible institutions like PriceWaterhouseCoopers have
said that “Pakistan economy is set to be among the 20 largest economies (G20) of
the World by 2030”. The whole of the nation deserves to take credit for this
impressive turnaround and we thank Allah (SWT). Without His help this would not
have been possible in such a short time.
Mr. Speaker,
6. I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the Parliament, the Prime
Minister Nawaz Sharif, and indeed the entire nation that after a long-time Pakistan 
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 3 of 71
has this year borrowed loans only for national development. Earlier we were not only
borrowing for our national development needs but also for our non-development
expenditure. This was leading us to a downward economic spiral where we had to
borrow to cover our expenses and a very large percentage of the budget was being
spent on debt servicing. This turnaround has been made possible by prudent fiscal
management, continued focus on enhancing revenues and reducing nondevelopment expenditure. This is not an ordinary achievement. Borrowing for
development is acceptable for any country or an organisation as the socio-economic
returns outweigh the cost of borrowing. Investing in the people of Pakistan and its
infrastructure will lead to even higher, sustainable and inclusive growth.
7. I would like to inform this house that as per the party manifesto of PML(N),
Pakistan has successfully completed its reform programme. During this period
difficult key structural reforms in the country have been implemented. Completion of
the programme has strengthened confidence of the international community in
government’s economic agenda. The government has put the country on the path of
self-sustenance which is being internationally recognised and is reflected in the
improved ratings by all major rating agencies including Moody’s, S&P and Fitch.
Where we were 4 years’ ago and where we are today?
Comparative Economic Performance 2012-13 vs. 2016-17
Mr. Speaker,
8. I would now present before this august House the main highlights of
Pakistan’s economic performance in the last four years:
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 4 of 71
(1) Real GDP Growth at 5.28% this year is the highest in the past decade.
Four years’ ago, the economic growth was 3.68%. Considering that the
World economy is likely to grow by 3.5% this year, Pakistan’s economy
is performing better than most countries in the World. There has an
improvement in every aspect due in Pakistan due to economic growth.
For the first time the size of the economy has surpassed $300 bilion;
(2) Alhamdolilah, our agriculture sector has turned around. The sector
has performed impressively this year. Compared to last year’s
stagnation this sector has registered a robust 3.46% growth. All major
crops including Wheat, Cotton, Sugarcane and Maize have registered
healthy growth. This turnaround in agriculture from stagnant growth is a
result of the Prime Minister’s Kisaan package announced in September
2015 and the extraordinary measures approved by this house as part
of budget 2016-17;
(3) Industrial production grew by 5.02% and businesses are now hiring
additional workers.
(4) Services sector - which includes banks, retail, transportation, housing,
etc. - grew by 5.98%;
(5) On average, income of each Pakistani has increased by 22% since
fiscal year 2012-13. Per capita income today stands at $1,629 as
compared to $1,334 four years ago;
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 5 of 71
(6) Inflation was on average 12% between 2008-13. In this current year
inflation is expected to be around 4.3%;
(7) Fiscal deficit: The government followed a policy of fiscal consolidation
because of which fiscal deficit reduced from 8.2% to the current year’s
4.2%. This was achieved through higher revenue collection through
improved administration and broadening of the tax base, undoing
decades-old concessionary SRO and curtailing non-development
expenditure of the government;
(8) FBR Revenues: In fiscal year 2012-13 FBR collection was Rs.1,946
billion. For the current year the target is Rs.3,521 billion. This
represents a historic increase of 81% in the last 4 years with average
annual growth of 20%. Tax to GDP ratio which was 10.1% in fiscal year
2012-13 is likely to increase to 13.2% this year;
(9) Policy rate of State Bank of Pakistan has come down from 9.5% in
June 2013 to the current 45-year low of 5.75%. Similarly, mark-up rates
of Export Refinance Facility have been reduced from 9.5% in June
2013 to 3% in July 2016. In addition, the mark-up rate on Long Term
Finance Facility has been gradually reduced from 11.4% in June 2013
to 6% for exporters and 5% for textile sector. This has led to a spurt in
credit to the private sector;
(10) Resultantly Credit to private sector has grown to Rs.507 billion till
May of this year, as compared to Rs.93 billion in fiscal year 2012-13,
resulting in expansion of business activity in the country;
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 6 of 71
(11) Agriculture credit was Rs.336 billion four year’s ago which at the end
of 2016 was Rs.600 billion and is targeted to increase to Rs.700 billion
during the current financial year;
(12) Imports: Imports have been recorded at $37.8 billion during July-April
showing an upward trajectory compared to the same period last year.
This vibrancy in imports is attributable to over 40% increase in capital
machinery, industrial raw material and petroleum products and the
increased investment under the CPEC projects focused on energy and
infrastructure sectors. All of this augurs well for Pakistan’s economy in
the near future;
(13) Exports during the first ten months of this year have shown an overall
minor decrease of 1.28% compared to 7.8% decline during the same
period last year. This reversal has been the result of timely support by
the government to exporters in shape of a comprehensive package of
Rs.180 billion in January 2017 and efforts of our exporters;
(14) Foreign Exchange Reserves: In June 2013 foreign exchange
reserves held with the State Bank were $6.3 billion which included
short-term swap of $2 billion for which payments were to be made
within weeks. This means that the real reserves were $4.3 billion. Our
foreign exchange reserves currently stand at a comfortable level of $16
billion despite a larger than expected trade deficit mainly due to
increased import of capital goods. If we include foreign exchange 
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 7 of 71
deposits with commercial banks, the total foreign exchange reserves of
the country have increased to around $21 billion;
(15) Exchange Rate: Inter bank rate of dollar on 30th June 2013 was
Rs.99.66. Within a few months this rate increased to around Rs.111.
After better economic management and increase in foreign reserves
the exchange rate reverted to Rs.99. Due to political disturbances
between August and December 2014 the rate again increased close to
104.80. Since then this rate is the same;
(16) Remittances: Over the past four years, Pakistani workers and
professionals working abroad have contributed a substantial amount of
remittances which increased from $13.9 billion to $19.9 billion. This
40% increase was made possible due to government’s revival and
payment of outstanding dues of Pakistan Remittance Initiative. The
remittances for the first ten months of the current FY stand at $15.6
billion and are expected to grow in the last two months due to
Ramazan and Eid despite challenging economic situation in the gulf
region. I thank the hard-working Pakistanis abroad who used banking
channels to send money to their relatives and friends in Pakistan and I
appeal them to use banking channels to send remittances so that they
can be contribute to Pakistan’s economy;
(17) Pakistan Stock exchange: The merger of the three stock exchanges
was completed in January 2016 after successful resolution of issues
pending for over a decade. Since then, Pakistan Stock Exchange has 
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 8 of 71
graduated from frontier to emerging markets in the Morgan Stanley
Capital International (MSCI) Index. It has been declared as Asia’s best
performer and 5th best performing market in the World by Bloomberg. It
is note worthy that the index has increased from 19,916 on 11 May
2013 to over 52,000 points currently. And during this period market
capitalisation has increased from $51 billion to $97.3 billion depicting a
90% increase;
(18) Registration of New Companies: This year 5,855 new companies
have been incorporated till March. Four years ago, in the entire
financial year 3,960 companies were incorporated;
(19) Enactment of Economic Laws: For an economy to unleash its growth
potential, there has to be in place an enabling legal and regulatory
environment. Realising the constraints that a less than effective legal
framework imposes on efficient governance and service delivery, the
government has in its tenure completed 24 pieces of legislation in
different sectors of the economy including; Benami Transactions
Prohibition Act, Special Economic Zones Amendment Act, Deposit
Protection Corporation Act, Credit Bureau Act, Corporate Restructuring
Companies Act, National Energy Efficiency and Conservation Act, AntiMoney Laundering Act, Gas Theft Control and Recovery Ordinance,
and Limited Liability Partnership Act. 10 new pieces of legislation are
currently in the process which would lead to further augment the
enabling legal environment required for a flourishing economy;
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 9 of 71
(20) Companies Law: The Parliament has approved the companies law
2017 only this week. I thank congratulate both the houses. This law has
replaced the 33-year old Companies Ordinance of 1984. This is a
major reform to consolidate the provisions / laws relating to companies
so as to encourage and promote corporatisation in Pakistan based on
the best international practices. This law will simplify procedures
creating ease of starting and doing business and protect investors. It
addresses issues related to protection of minority shareholders and
creditors, eases regulatory compliance requirements for smaller
companies, and among others provides relaxation for registration of
agricultural promotion companies for the development of agriculture
sector. Keeping in view the importance of women, the new law will
allow women membership in boards of directors of listed companies;
(21) Ease of Doing Business: Reforms have been undertaken to make it
easy for firms to do business in the country. As a result, Pakistan’s
ranking in the World Bank’s ease of Doing Business index improved
from 148 to 144 in the report launched in 2016, based on performance
in 2015. Pakistan was also recognised as one of the top ten reforming
countries in the World. On the basis of additional reforms undertaken
during the period 2016, Pakistan expects further improvement in the
ranking of World Bank’s Doing Business report to be published in
October 2017;
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 10 of 71
(22) To encourage documentation in the economy, for the first time
registered prize bonds of Rs.40,000 have been introduced. Registered
bonds of different denominations will be introduced in FY 2017-18;
Mr. Speaker,
9. The above accomplishments are the result of timely but difficult decisions that
the government has taken over the past four years. We are resolved to continue the
journey towards structural reforms with stabilisation measures. I would now highlight
some of the key reforms that have been undertaken this year:
(1) We have signed the letter of intent to join ‘Open Government
Partnership’ initiative. The OGP is a global partnership of over 70
countries including most of the developed countries. While a country
can show its intent to join, its membership is by invitation only when
you meet its criteria. The fact that we met 15 of its 16 criteria; and
Pakistan was formally invited to join OGP on the 7th December
2016, which itself speaks of the major improvements that Pakistan
has made in transparency and openness in its governance;
(2) OECD’s Multilateral Convention: In the last budget speech, I said
that we were trying our best to sign the OECD’s Multilateral
Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Tax Matters.
This was based on our commitment to fight tax evasion and
avoidance. In January 2014, after Federal Cabinet’s approval we
started the journey. Since then, the Coordinating Body (CB) of the
Multilateral Convention evaluated Pakistan’s laws. Based on their
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 11 of 71
recommendations, this Parliament made changes to income tax
laws through Finance Bills 2015 and 2016 after which Pakistan
received invitation to join the Convention in July 2016. On 14th
September 2016, representing Pakistan I signed the joining
documents of the Convention. As a result of joining this Convention,
in the matters of tax at an international stage, we will be able to
receive details in coming years. This will help us improve our tax
governance and tax avoidance will be effectively tackled;
(3) Agreement on Avoidance of Double Taxation (AADT): We have
also now signed the revised agreement on Avoidance of Double
Taxation with Switzerland. Pakistan’s existing Agreement with
Switzerland signed in 2005, and enforced in 2008, was deficient for
meaningful exchange of information with reference to the
internationally accepted standard. Therefore, this government took
the initiative in August 2013 to renegotiate the AADT and with
consistent efforts, was able to update the Article on exchange of
information in the treaty. The revised treaty is now in the process of
ratification and shall become effective thereafter. Under the
agreement for the purposes of tax, details will be available regarding
financial books and banking. I would also like to point out that
renegotiations took longer than expected because the Swiss side
was seeking extraordinary concessions in return. Alhamdolilah, we
have been able to successfully include these negotiations without
conceding any concessions.
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 12 of 71
10. These reform efforts have improved Pakistan’s image abroad and sent a
message to the international community that Pakistan’s believes in joining the World
in promoting good governance, transparency, and accountability at all levels.
Mr. Speaker,
11. The brief overview of main economic performance indicators that I have just
presented clearly demonstrate that over the past four years’ after achieving
macroeconomic stability our government’s focus as per the Vision of the Prime
Minister Nawaz Sharif is higher, inclusive and sustainable growth path.
Mr. Speaker,
12. I have mentioned some of the structural reforms undertaken during the past
four years. From next year, our top priority will be to consolidate and build on the
economic gains achieved so far. In this regard, I will now discuss next year’s
economic targets.
Mr. Speaker,
13. Economic targets of FY 2017-18:
(1) Increase in real GDP growth of 6%;
(2) Investment to GDP 17%;
(3) Development budget of Rs.1,001 billion
(4) Inflation below 6%;
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 13 of 71
(5) Budget deficit at 4.1% of GDP;
(6) Tax to GDP ratio at 13.7%;
(7) Foreign exchange reserves level that can cover a minimum of 4
months of imports;
(8) Net public debt to GDP ratio below 60% of GDP;
(9) Continuation of targeted social interventions.
Initiatives to achieve targets - Main Elements of Budget Strategy
Mr. Speaker,
14. In order to achieve the above targets, we have defined a strategy which
includes the following details:
(1) FBR revenues are targeted to increase by 14% while the Federal
expenditures will grow by 11%;
(2) Non-tax receipts of the Federal government are budgeted to
increase by 7%.
(3) By keeping the current expenditure under tight control, we will be
able to create substantial space for development. Federal PSDP for
the next year is budgeted at Rs.1,001 billion. This is 40% higher
than revised estimates of Rs.715 billion for the current financial year. 
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 14 of 71
If we add the provincial ADPs the outlay for development of FY
2017-18 would be a whopping Rs.2.1 trillion;
(4) At the same time, current expenditure will be contained below the
level of inflation;
(5) New initiatives are being announced for agriculture, financial
sector, exports, textile, social sector and employment. This is being
done with the aim to boost our economic activity even further. The
purpose is to increase job prospects and incomes of the people. I
will present these initiatives in a short-while;
(6) Tax incentives are being announced with the aim to give facilitation
to the agriculture, SMEs, and IT sectors;
(7) Under the leadership and personal supervision of Prime Minister
Nawaz Sharif through Cabinet Committee on Energy, approximately
10,000 MW of electricity will be added to the national grid by
summer 2018. This will Inshallah eliminate load shedding;
(8) Investments will be made to speed up the process of development
of Gwadar including development of airport, hospital and
desalination plant;
(9) Around 5.5 million women-led families in the country who do not
have economic means for sustenance will continued to be provided
with cash transfer of Rs.19,338 per annum. For this purpose, Rs.121 
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 15 of 71
billion are proposed to be allocated to Benazir Income Support
Programme. This allocation has increased to 300% of Rs.40 billion
in fiscal year 2012-13. During this period, the number of recipient
families have increased from 3.7 million families in 2013 to around
5.5 million. In addition, around 1.3 million primary school children
are receiving cash grants;
(10) The state will continue to subsidise bills of the low-income domestic
consumers up to 300 units per month in shape of electricity
subsidy. For the farmers in Balochistan, the Federal Government
will pay a portion of their electricity bills to run agriculture tube wells.
The Federal Government’s will continue to provide electricity
subsidies on tube-wells in Balochistan. Off-peak rate of Rs.5.35 per
unit for agriculture tube-wells will continue in the FY 2017-18. An
amount of Rs.118 billion has been proposed in the FY 2017-18 for
these measures;
(11) The Prime Minister’s youth schemes which include business loan
scheme, interest free loan scheme, training scheme, skill
development programme, fee reimbursement, and laptop
programme will continue. For this purpose Rs.20 billion is proposed
in the fiscal year 2017-18.
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 16 of 71
Special Initiatives 2017-18
Mr. Speaker,
15. Under the leadership of the Prime Minister we are committed to serve people
of this country. This nation deserves a better and brighter future. In this regard, I will
now present special initiatives:
Welfare Schemes
16. BISP Beneficiary Graduation Program - Grants to Self-Sustaining
Individuals: Previously, the poverty incidence in the country was measured under
the Food-Energy Intake methodology in which the poverty headcount that was
34.7% in 2002 reduced to 9.3% in 2014. However, Pakistan has now also adopted a
new methodology based on the Cost-of-Basic-Needs (CBN) formula of World Bank.
Under this methodology, the poverty headcount which was over 64% in 2002 has
reduced to 29.5% in FY 2014. While the government is providing support to people
with limited income, it is also encouraging the beneficiaries of Benazir Income
Support Programme to learn skills and start their own enterprises so that they can
graduate out of the scheme. To finalise this transition the government is announcing
a new scheme. In the FY 2017-18, BISP beneficiary families who are willing to start
their own businesses will be provided with training as well as a one-time cash grant
of Rs.50,000 to start their own business and become productive members of society.
Initially this grant is proposed to be provided to 250,000 families. The beneficiaries
will therefore, be able to graduate from this programme.
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 17 of 71
17. Off grid solutions in small cities: In order to facilitate provision of electricity
to remote areas and small cities where there are no transmission lines, the
Government, in partnership with the World Bank, will introduce solar-powered offgrid electricity system for residents of small towns and cities in sparsely populated
areas of the country with special focus on Balochistan.
Agriculture Sector
18. Agriculture is the mainstay for the people and the economy of Pakistan.
Keeping in view the primacy of agriculture in the rural economy the Prime Minister
announced a Kisaan Package in 2015 with a total financial outlay of Rs.341 billion
which included direct support to rice and cotton farmers, reduced taxes on
agriculture machinery from 45% to 9%, reduced Sales Tax on cold chain machinery
from 17% to 7%, a tax holiday for agriculture delivery chain for three years, provision
of mark-up free loans to the farmers for solar tube wells, reduced sales tax on
pesticides and seed, reduced mark-up for agricultural loans, subsidised crop
insurance and increased volume of agricultural loans.
19. In order to give further boost to agriculture sector, a number of new supportive
initiatives were taken in budget 2016-17 including; crop loan insurance scheme,
livestock insurance scheme, concession of customs duty on the dairy, livestock and
poultry sectors, elimination of sales tax on pesticides, exemption of customs duty on
cool chain machinery and silos, and reduction in fertilizer prices. As a result, the
staple agriculture input of urea fertilizer reduced to Rs.1,400 per bag as compared to
Rs.1,800 last year and DAP prices reduced from Rs.4,200 per bag to Rs.2,500 per
bag. Reduction in prizes of fertilizer was achieved through a mix of subsidies and tax 
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 18 of 71
concessions. The outcomes of these measures are evident in increase in offtake of
fertilizers and production of major crops. As a result of these measures a stagnant
agriculture sector has grown by 3.46% in FY 2016-17. All of these schemes and
initiatives shall continue in next FY 2017-18.
20. The following new measures are being proposed in the next year’s budget:
(1) Reduced mark-up rates: Mark-up rates currently charged ranges
between 14% to 15%. I am happy to announce that from 1
st July
2017, ZTBL and National Bank of Pakistan will launch a new
scheme for small farmers with holdings of 12.5 acres who will be
provided agricultural loans at a reduced rate of 9.9% per annum.
The other features of the scheme are:
i. Small loan of up to Rs.50,000 per farmer will be provided;
ii. Two million loans shall be provided by ZTBL, NBP and other
banks;
iii. State Bank of Pakistan will monitor the implementation of this
new scheme.
(2) Enhancement in the target of agriculture credit: Credit
availability for the small farmers is a major constraint in the use of
farm inputs. In order to facilitate the farmers, the volume of
agriculture credit is being enhanced to Rs.1,001 billion from the last
year’s target of Rs.700 billion which will be an increase of 43%. My 
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 19 of 71
Parliamentarian colleagues may kindly note that this target exactly
matches Federal development budget of Rs.1,001 billion for the FY
2017-18;
(3) Maintaining Fertilizer Prices:
i. As a further measure to support farmers, the government has
already decided to sell the existing stock of imported Urea
Fertilizer available with NFML at a concessional Rs.1,000 per
bag;
ii. In order to create ease of disbursement of subsidy on DAP, it
has been decided that DAP will be subject to fixed sales tax. As
a result, GST is being reduced from Rs.400 to Rs.100. This will
have a subsidy impact of Rs.13.8 billion;
iii. Through reduction in tax rates and subsidy the price of per bag
of Urea shall be maintained up to Rs.1,400 per bag in the FY
2017-18. This will have a subsidy impact of Rs.11.6 billion;
iv. Prices of NP, NPK, SSP and CAN fertilizers will also be
maintained at their current price levels through appropriate tax
adjustments.
(4) Use of Land Revenue Records for Mortgage Financing: In order
to facilitate the farmers in obtaining credit from banks, the State
Bank of Pakistan shall take steps to align the banking system with 
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 20 of 71
the Land Record Management Information System for mortgaging of
a property by the banks/farmers. Use of these automated records
will help farmers in obtaining credit;
(5) Plants Breeders Rights Registry is being established to register
new high quality seeds. This is aimed at increasing crop yields in the
country;
(6) Cheap electricity for agri-tube wells: The government will
continue provision of subsidised tariff on agri-tube wells at the rate
of Rs.5.35 per unit in FY 2017-18. This is estimated to cost around
Rs.27 billion in FY 2017-18;
(7) Production Index Units will be increased from Rs.4,000 to
Rs.5,000. This will facilitate farmers to obtain maximum credit from
the banks;
(8) Agriculture Tax Relief Measures:
i. Combined harvesters: There is a growing trend of using
combined harvesters. However, the combined harvesters
currently being imported are 20 - 30 years old and are almost
junk. As a result, the harvesting losses can be as high as 10%.
In order to reduce these losses, it has been decided to
encourage the import of newer agriculture machinery.
Accordingly, it has been decided to reduce the customs duty 
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 21 of 71
and sales tax at import stage to 0% 5 years on new and up to 5
years old combined harvesters machinery.
ii. Removal of GST on imported sunflower and canola hybrid
seeds- GST on imported sunflower and canola hybrid seeds is
being removed;
iii. Reduction of sales tax rate on imported machinery for
poultry- Sales tax rate from 17% to 7% on certain imported
machinery/equipment for poultry is being made;
iv. Sales tax on import and local supply of agricultural diesel
engines between 3 to 36 Horse Power for tube-wells currently
having rate of 17% is proposed to be exempted.
Export Promotion and Textile
Mr. Speaker,
21. Textile sector is the backbone of Pakistan’s economy and significantly
contributes in the employment, usage of raw material, exports and economic growth.
In view of its importance, the Government has provided special packages for the this
sector since 2013. I would like to recapitulate some of the important measures:
(1) Mark-up rate on Long Term Financing Facility stands reduced
from 11.4% to 5%;
(2) Duty free import of textile machinery is allowed;
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 22 of 71
(3) Uninterrupted supply of electricity and gas is ensured for the textile
sector;
(4) Technology Up-gradation Fund (TUF) Scheme 2016-19 for the
textile sector has been introduced;
(5) Prime Minister’s package for exporters was announced in January
2017 in which the centre-piece is the textile sector;
(6) The government made five export oriented sectors - including textile,
leather, sports goods, surgical goods and carpets - as part of zerorated sales tax regime last year. This will continue during the next
financial year;
(7) Similarly duty free import of textile machinery will continue.
22. All the measures announced in FY 2016-17 will be continued in FY 2017-18.
Maintaining our past tradition of supporting the textile sector, following measures are
proposed in the FY 2017-18:
(1) To stabilise cotton prices in the country, a system of cotton hedge
trading for the domestic cotton will be initiated in consultation with
stakeholders;
(2) In consultation with public and private stakeholders, the government
will launch Brand Development fund for textile sector;
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 23 of 71
(3) The approval process of establishment of 1,000 stitching units
has been completed and its implementation will start during FY
2017-18 and shall be completed in three years;
(4) Textile Ministry will launch the first ever online textile
business/trade portal for textiles using B2B (business to
business) and B2C (business to consumer) mode. This will bring
Pakistan textiles’ value chain in line with global marketing practices.
23. Pakistan’s exports have suffered due to slow-down in global trade and
reduction in commodity prices. To increase exports, the government implemented a
number of initiatives which will also continue for the next year:
(1) Mark-up rates of Export Refinance Facility have been reduced from
9.5% in June 2013 to 3% in July 2016. In addition, the mark-up rate
on Long Term Finance Facility has been gradually reduced from
11.4% in June 2013 to 6% in 2015. These initiatives have resulted in
reduction of input costs for exporters.
24. In addition, new initiatives are as follows;
(1) The custom duty on raw-hides and skins will be reduced to zero;
(2) Stamping foil used in producing high value added finished leather
will also be exempted from customs duty;
(3) Rice exporters are facing difficulties in marketing due to long
distances from their potential market. In order to facilitate the export 
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 24 of 71
of rice, it is being decided in principle to allow warehousing of rice
outside Pakistan. Ministry of Commerce, State Bank and Rice
Export Association of Pakistan will develop details of this scheme.
Housing Sector
25. Risk Sharing Guarantee Scheme: There is over 1 million shortage of
housing units in the country. Every year an additional demand of 300,000 units is
being added to this gap. Availability of long-term financing is a major hurdle. The
banks are shy of offering long-term financing. In order to overcome this hurdle to
housing loans, Risk Sharing Guarantee Scheme for low-income housing will be
launched. Under this scheme, the Government will provide 40 percent credit
guarantee cover to Banks and DFIs for home financing for up to Rs.1 million. Rs.6
billion have been allocated for this purpose. It has been decided that this facility will
also be made available through micro-finance banks.
Infrastructure Finance
26. To fulfil the needs of infrastructure, the government has increased
development spending on permanent basis. The government has consistently
increased its development spending to match the financing needs of infrastructure
sector. In addition to financing for public sector infrastructure the government is also
facilitating private sector investment and finance in infrastructure through a range of
policy instruments and regulations. These include a Public Private Partnership
framework, new prudential regulations for infrastructure finance and development of
new institutions and instruments. 
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 25 of 71
(1) Pakistan Development Fund (PDF) has been created which will be
made fully operational soon. PDF will provide long-term
infrastructure financing for commercially viable public sector and
PPP projects. The international development partners have
expressed their interest to provide further support through PDF;
(2) Pakistan Infrastructure Bank (PIB): Pakistan Infrastructure Bank
(PIB) will also be established to provide infrastructure financing for
commercially viable private sector projects. This effort will be
spearheaded by the IFC with a 20% equity of the Government
through PDF, while the remaining share will be private sector. The
Bank is expected to assist in introducing innovative project financing
tools such as building domestic infrastructure bond market and
creating contingent financing products which include credit
guarantees, credit default swaps, foreign currency liquidity facility
and refinancing options;
(3) Public Private Partnership Act: The PPP authority bill has been
enacted by the Parliament recently. This Act provides a regulatory
framework for promotion of financing public-private-partnership
projects in the country. This will also cater to the requirement of
viability gap funding of large sized public sector projects.
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 26 of 71
Financial Sector
27. In recent years, our financial sector has demonstrated good performance. To
further strengthen the financial sector in the country following measures are being
taken:
(1) Financial Inclusion: In order to increase access to financial
services for the vast majority of the people, the government is
implementing the National Financial Inclusion Strategy. For the next
year, the following initiatives are being proposed:
i. A Rs.8 billion fund will be created at the State Bank of Pakistan
to provide loans to low-income segments through microfinance
banks;
ii. In order to facilitate transactions through mobile banking, egateway systems, mobile banking, the Government is
establishing a state-of-the-art e-gateway systems at the State
Bank of Pakistan at a cost of Rs.200 million. Technical training
and handholding of the service delivery organisations shall also
be undertaken through this project;
iii. Exemption from withholding tax on Cash Withdrawals by
Branchless Banking Agents- exemptions on withholding tax
will be given on withdrawal of cash from branchless banking;
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 27 of 71
iv. Pakistan Micro Finance Investment Company: The
Government of Pakistan in 2016 launched Pakistan
Microfinance Investment Company (PMIC) jointly with DFID and
KFW to augment the availability of capital for Micro Finance
institutions. It is estimated that this will lead to doubling of small
loans;
(2) Disaster Risk Management Fund: This fund has been created with
the main aim to provide disaster risk management and
preparedness assistance to communities. An Endowment Fund of
Rs.12.58 billion has been created..
Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs)
28. SMEs are the backbone of any economy. Unfortunately, the growth of SMEs
is stunted in Pakistan. Any growth that we witness is in the informal sector. The
following new measures are being announced:
(a) Access to finance for SMEs: The biggest constraint of the SMEs
sector is access to credit. Banks are generally reluctant to offer
credit to the SME sector because of high risk attached to the
sector. In order to enable banks to provide financing to SME
sector, the Government is planning to introduce Risk Mitigation
Facility for Small and Medium Enterprises through a Rs.3.5 billion
fund to be established in the SBP. The facility will cater to both
Islamic and conventional banking products;
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 28 of 71
(b) Innovation Challenge Fund: Investment in new technologies is
imperative to give impetus to small businesses to keep pace with
the changing market requirements. Technologies are involved at all
levels of industry and supply chain uses continuous upgrade and
improvement to maintain profitability. To cater this requirement of
SMEs, the Government is announcing establishment of an
Innovation Challenge Fund with Rs.500 million. This fund will be
professionally managed in collaboration with the key technology
universities of Pakistan;
(c) Secure Transaction registry for Movable Property: In order to
encourage SME and agriculture lending the Government has
passed Financial Institutions Secure Transactions Act 2016. The
law provides for establishment of an electronic registry which will
enable the small borrowers in SME and agriculture sector to obtain
small loans by pledging their moveable property. Federal
Government shall establish the registry during the next financial
year.
Information Technology
29. From agricultural revolution to the industrial revolution, the World is now
undergoing an information revolution. It is leading to the use of Information
Technology in every sector of human activity be it communication, banking, trading,
learning, entertainment, e-commerce, government and management. Just as
machines have extended man’s mechanical power and his convenience and 
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 29 of 71
comfort, Information Technology is extending man’s mind or brain or intellectual
power. In future, the gap between industrialised and non-industrial countries will
become less pronounced than the one between IT enabled societies and others. The
Government of Pakistan is cognizant of this challenge and has taken a number of
measures in past and we will continue with similar measures. New measures for this
sector are as follows:
(a) The Government will set up a IT software park in Islamabad with
the help of Korean Government at a cost of 6 billion rupees. The
financial arrangements for this have been concluded and the
construction work shall start soon;
(b) The start-up software houses shall be exempted from Income
Tax for the first 3 years;
(c) Exports of IT services from Islamabad and other Federal territories
shall be exempted from Sales Tax;
(d) IT export houses/ companies shall be allowed to open Foreign
Exchange Accounts in Pakistan on the condition that deposit in
these accounts shall only be allowed through remittances from
abroad in respect of their export earnings. They will be allowed to
use these accounts for meeting business related payments outside
Pakistan;
(e) Mobile phones are an important element in providing IT
connectivity. The mobile telephony is heavily taxed. It has been 
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 30 of 71
decided to provide a relief to common man by reducing the
withholding income tax on cell phone call from 14% to 12.5% and
Federal Excise Duty from 18.5% to 17%. We hope that in the same
spirit the provincial government shall also reduce the rate of sales
tax on mobile telephony;
(f) In order to encourage use of smart / android phones - custom duty
shall be reduced from Rs.1,000 to Rs.650;
(g) Import duty is being reduced on mobile telecom products.
Development Plan - PSDP
Mr. Speaker,
30. Our development agenda for this year continues to be in line with the vision of
the Prime Minister for achieving higher, sustainable and inclusive growth, with the
aim to reduce poverty, build up human capital, improve infrastructure, balanced
development, improve food security, water and energy security. The Federal
Government’s development expenditure is now over three times compared to that of
Rs.324 billion in 2012-13. The Federal PSDP is being increased to Rs.1,001 billion -
which when compared with the revised estimates of Rs.715 billion, is 40% higher
than last year. The total size of the development budget of the Federal Government
and that of provinces is Rs.2,113 billion up from revised estimates of Rs.1,539 billion
(Federal Rs 715 Billion and Provincial ADPs Rs 824 Billion). This means that the
overall government sector has geared up to enhance its share of development 
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 31 of 71
spending by 37%. This will result in creation of millions of jobs. Increase in
development expenditure will also lead to increase in investment by the private
sector.
31. As we all know, development of infrastructure and energy has generally been
neglected in the past. Our government has completely reversed this trend. Today,
most of the Federal development budget is allocated for roads and communication
infrastructure, and energy. This is a major shift in our economic policy and this shift
is the foundation of our future economic growth projections. Infrastructure has been
allocated 67% of the total development outlay. Highest priority has been accorded to
transport and communication sector with an allocation of Rs.411 billion including
Rs.320 billion for national highways, Rs.43 billion for railways and Rs.44 billion for
other projects including aviation schemes.
32. The housing and population census is currently underway after 19 years but
we do not anticipate any major shift in age composition. Youth under the age of 20
will continue to be the largest portion of our population. Therefore, our development
plan is focused on development in human and social capital, education, health,
empowerment of women, poverty alleviation, job creation and addressing inequality.
Mr. Speaker,
33. I would like to highlight the key programmes of Federal Government’s
development budget:
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 32 of 71
Energy
34. Being an energy deficient country, Pakistan is unable to actualise its
economic potential. By 2018 Inshallah 10,000 MW of additional electricity will
become part of the national grid. In addition, financial close have taken place for
15,000 MW of electricity generation projects beyond 2018. In this regard, the
government is proposing Rs.401 billion for power sector development including
investment of Rs.317 billion to be undertaken by WAPDA for the next year. A new
programme called ‘Energy for All’ is being introduced with an initial outlay of Rs.12.5
billion. Some of the key projects in which the government will invest are as follows:
(1) Rs.76.5 billion have been allocated for the two LNG based power
plants in Balloki and Haveli Bahadurshah. Both projects will be
completed during the year, and generate 2,400 MWs of electricity;
(2) Rs.54 billion have been allocated for Dasu Hydro Power project. In
stage-I the project is envisaged to generate 2,160 MW of electricity;
(3) Rs.21 billion have been allocated for construction of Diamer Bhasha
Dam - Lot 1 which will generate 4,500 MW of electricity;
(4) For Neelum Jehlum Hydro Power Project Rs.19.6 billion have been
allocated. Through this project 969 MW of electricity will be generated.
This project shall also be completed during the year;
(5) Rs.16.4 billion have been allocated for completing fourth extension of
Tarbela Hydel Power which will generate 1,410 MW of electricity;
(6) Rs.16.2 billion have been allocated for installation of 1,200 MW coal
fired power plant in Jamshoro; 
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 33 of 71
(7) In addition, work on two Karachi Nuclear Power Projects with combined
capability of 2,200 MW and Chashma Civil Nuclear Power plant with
600 MW capacity will be continued;
35. The gap between generation and demand of electricity is only one facet of the
challenge that we face. In the past, no significant investments have been made in
the areas of transmission and distribution. The result is that even if we improve our
generation, we will not be able to deliver electricity to the consumer. Since this year
we are taking emergent measures to rectify the situation. The Matiari Lahore
transmission line is being built. This is backed by a heavy investment in grid-stations
and distribution lines across the country.
Water
36. Pakistan is likely to become a water scarce country if investments in this
sector are not made. The government is therefore, placing increased emphasis on
building dams and canals / water courses. Other than the large hydro power projects
that I have mentioned above, the government is allocating Rs.38 billion for the
development of water sector. Key projects such as extension of right bank outfall
drain (RBOD - II), RBOD - I and Kaachi Canal will be given the largest share in the
water sector portfolio. Priority will be accorded to completion of Kaachi Canal.
Collectively, these three projects will be allocated Rs.17.7 billion. In addition, a
number of water sector projects in Balochistan, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Punjab and
Sindh will be continued to address the water shortage in the provinces. 
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 34 of 71
National Highways
37. Pakistan’s geographical location provides a comparative advantage in
connecting the regional countries. Over the past three years’ the government has
focused on building deficient infrastructure with the view to translate the comparative
advantage into sustainable economic growth. For the next year, we propose a
massive outlay of Rs.320 billion as compared to Rs.188 billion allocated in the
outgoing year. This represents the largest increase of 70% for development of roads,
motorways, highways and bridges. The investment is being enhanced from Rs.51
billion in 2013. Key projects of this sector are as follows:
(1) Rs.48 billion have been allocated for 230 KM Lahore-Abdul-Hakeem
section;
(2) Rs.35 billion have been allocated for 387 KM Multan-Sukkur section;
(3) Rs.2.5 billion have been allocated for Sukkur-Hyderabad section. This
project is being undertaken with private sector partnership;
(4) Rapid progress is underway on Karachi Hyderabad motorway. One
part of this has been inaugurated;
(5) Rs.38 billion have allocated for construction of Hakla to Yarik D.I Khan
Motorway;
(6) Rs.10 billion have been allocated for construction of FaisalabadKhanewal expressway (184 KM);
(7) Burhan Havelian expressway is allocated Rs.3 billion;
(8) Rs.26 billion have been allocate for Thakot to Havelian;
(9) Rs.2.7 billion are allocated for restoration of Dera Ismail Khan Mughal
Kot and Zhob road;
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 35 of 71
(10) Rs.2.5 billion have been allocation in Balochistan for Khuzdar and
Panjgoor - Hoshab, Bisma, Sohrab Section and Gaward Turbat
Hoashab section.
Railways
38. Improving Railways infrastructure and improving its services is an important
policy initiative of the government. Railways provides cheap, reliable and fast mode
of transport. Over the past four years, an impressive turnaround has been achieved.
Each year revenues are increasing, passenger and freight services are being
improved, and new locomotives and rolling stock are being added. The government
is fully committed to reinvigorate our national asset. Accordingly, Rs.42.9 billion have
been proposed for the next year’s budget. Allocations for the next year in the key
projects include:
(a) Rs.15.8 billion for the procurement / manufacturing of 75 Nos new
locomotives;
(b) Rs.4.5 billion for the procurement / manufacturing of 830 high
capacity bogie freight wagons and 250 passenger coaches; and
(c) The backbone of Pakistan’s infrastructure is the Peshawar to
Karachi Railways - technically called the ML-1. A Memorandum of
Understanding has been signed with China for its improvement
and upgradation. This is a massive project which will introduce the
next generation of railways in Pakistan;
(d) Rs.4.2 billion for preliminary design / drawings for upgrade /
rehabilitation of ML-1 line and establishment of dryport near
Havelian have been allocated in next year's budget.
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 36 of 71
Human Development
39. Human development occupies a central focus in Vision 2025. The
government will continue to invest in this area. For this reason, allocations in the
Higher Education Commission are proposed to be increased from Rs.21.5 billion in
the current year to Rs.35.7 billion in the next financial year. In addition to PSDP,
HEC will be allocated Rs.60.2 billion for recurrent budget. For the Ministry of National
Health Services, Regulations and Coordination allocations have been increased from
Rs.25 billion to Rs.49 billion. This means that investment is being doubled as
compared to the outgoing year. A new programme for hospitals with the cost of
Rs.80 billion is being started for which Rs.8 billion have been allocated for next year.
In addition, the Phase-II of Prime Minister’s national health programme is being
launched with the total cost of Rs.10 billion. Investments in vertical health
programmes including EPI, Family Planning and Primary Health care and Population
welfare programmes are being enhanced as compared to the last year.
40. Two-thirds of all ailments are water-borne. Clean drinking water is a cine quo
non for improvement in the public health. A special programme by the name of
‘Clean Drinking Water for all’ is being launched for which Rs.12.5 billion are
proposed to be allocated for the next year’s budget. Furthermore, Rs.30 billion are
being proposed for the Prime Minister’s SDG programme which would focus on
national commitments to improvement in the social indicators.
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 37 of 71
Development of Gwadar
41. Development of Gwadar is fundamental to development of China-Pakistan
Economic Corridor. A comprehensive plan is being implemented for the road link
networks, expansion and modernisation of the airport, and development of the area.
31 projects for development of Gwadar are provided in 2017-18 for this purpose
which include projects such as implementation of Gwadar master plan, New Gwadar
international airport, a 200-bed hospital, 200 MW power generation, and desalination
plant.
42. CPEC projects would enter into their third year of implementation during
2017-18. Funds to the tune of Rs.180 billion have been proposed for CPEC and its
supporting projects during the next financial year.
Special Areas
43. For fast track development in Special Areas, Rs.62 billion have been
allocated. On the direction of the Prime Minister, the development funds for Azad
Jammu and Kashmir and Gilgit Baltistan have been increased from Rs.25.75 billion
in FY 2016-17 to Rs.43.64 billion for the FY 2017-18 - which is a historic increase of
69%, and Rs.26.9 billion are being allocated for Federally Administered Tribal Areas
(FATA).
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 38 of 71
Peace and Security
44. On the directions of the Prime Minister an operation was started in September
2013 to bring back joys of Karachi. Very positive results have been obtained through
this.
45. Pakistan is a frontline state in the global ware against terror. We as a nation
have in both men and material suffered heavy losses. In June 2014 the Government
decided to launch a major offensive against the last safe heavens of the terrorists in
North Waziristan and tribal areas, and the Pak Military started operation Zarb-e-Azb.
Nation is proud of the fact that Pakistan’s brave armed forces defeated covered
enemies who would attack in hiding. Some were killed, some were captured while
some ran away. This victory is the result of hard work of our valiant soldiers. Today
the entire World faces terrorism but no military has had such a comprehensive
victory as Pak Army did. Our Jawans spent time away from their lovedones even in
difficult times, embraced Martyrdom, got disabled but they did not lose courage and
at last we succeeded. Terrorists were eliminated from Waziristan and other tribal
areas. At times the terrorists cross border but face our brave offices and valiant
officers.
46. On behalf of the Prime Minister, to recognise the brave sacrifices of brave
pillar, I announce today that a 10% increase will be given on the pay of all officers
and Jawans as special allowance. This allowance will be in addition to the increase
in pay that will be announced.
47. Large operations like Zarb-e-Azb require vast sums. This is our national duty
against terrorism for which provision of resources is the responsibility of the entire 
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 39 of 71
nation. For this reason, over the past three years the government has been paying
Rs.90 to Rs.100 billion each year directly or indirectly. Directly for the spending on
military operations and indirectly on the rehabilitation, return, reconstruction of the
area. In this regard, the National Security Committee recommended that 3% of
Gross Divisible Pool should be allocated for this national duty. This matter is under
discussion in the CCI and NFC.
48. Similarly, for Kashmir, Gilgit Baltistan and FATA discussions to allocate 3% of
Gross Divisible Pool are underway with the provinces. In the last National Economic
Council meeting the Prime Minister of AJK, the Chief Minister of Gilgit Baltistan and
the Governor of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa as the President’s Agent for FATA had made
an impassioned plea that they were also part of Pakistan. They also have a right on
the divisible pool.
49. I would like to clarify that the delay in decision of 3+3 of the Gross Divisible
Pool for this purpose, has been the cause for delay in the finalising the NFC Award. I
would request my fellow parliamentarians to lend their support vis-à-vis the provincial
governments for this just and fair allocation.
Mr. Speaker,
Budget Estimates 2017-18
50. I would now like to present key budget numbers for the budget year 2017-18:
(a) The total revenue is estimated at Rs.5,310. This includes FBR tax
estimate of Rs.4,013 billion as compared to revised estimate of 
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 40 of 71
Rs.3,521 billion. As compared to revised estimates of FY 2016-17
the total revenue is being increased by 12.1%. While the FBR tax
revenue is estimated to increase by 14%;
(b) Out of the total revenues, the provincial governments share is
estimated to be Rs.2,384 billion as compared to Rs.2,121 billion
revised estimates for 2016-17, showing an increase of about
around 12.4%. These resources will be utilized by the provincial
governments in enhancing human development and security of the
people.;
(c) After transfer to provincial governments, the net revenue of the
Federal Government is estimated at Rs.2,926 billion in 2017-18 as
compared to revised estimates of Rs.2,616 billion in the current
financial year.
(d) Total expenditure for FY 2017-18, is budgeted at Rs.4,753 billion
compared to the revised estimates of Rs.4,256 billion for 2016-17,
showing an increase of 11.7%. Out of the total expenditure highest
increase is accorded to the development budget.
(e) The defence budget is proposed at Rs.920 billion against the
revised budget of Rs.841 billion in the FY 2016-17;
(f) As I had said earlier, the PSDP budget is being increased from
revised estimates of Rs.715 billion to Rs.1,001 showing a 40%
increase;
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 41 of 71
(g) The result of the above revenue and expenditure estimates is that
the budget deficit will be reduced to 4.1% of GDP as opposed to
4.2% of GDP of revised budget estimate in the financial year in
2016-17.
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 42 of 71
PART-II
FBR Tax
51. During the last four years, the government initiated far-reaching structural and
administrative reforms for moving towards a more efficient and equitable tax system.
The comprehensive strategy for medium term period aims at increasing tax-to-GDP
ratio to a respectable level of 15 percent.
52. FBR initiated a historic exercise to eliminate discriminatory concessions and
exemptions. Concessions and tax exemptions above Rs.300 Billion were withdrawn
in three years. Other areas of reforms included broadening of tax base, increasing
the cost of non-compliance, tariff reforms, simplification of business processes for
taxpayer’s facilitation and effective enforcement through enhanced use of
automation.
53. Moving in the same direction, the broad principle of the proposed taxation
measures for FY 2017-18 include consolidation of the gains made in the period of
this government through extension of differential taxation for rewarding compliance
and penalizing non-compliance, protection of domestic industry, removal of
distortions, cutting down on discretion, measures for ease of doing business,
providing incentives for growth and employment generation and increase in the
share of direct taxes.
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 43 of 71
54. I have already placed before the house, in earlier part of the speech, the tax
relief and growth measures that have been proposed for the different sectors of the
economy.
55. Now I shall place before the House further relief and tax measures that are
proposed to be introduced in the current Budget starting with income tax measures.
INCOME TAX
RELIEF MEASURES
56. Rationalizing Corporate Tax Rate- As per government policy and in order to
encourage corporatization, corporate tax rates are being reduced by 1% each year
starting from 35% in TY 2013 and coming down to 30% in TY 2018. As per our
commitment the corporate tax rate will be 30% for the next year i.e.TY 2018.
57. Incentives for Islamic Banking- On the recommendation of the State Bank
of Pakistan and to promote Islamic mode of Financing tax neutrality for Islamic
Banking instruments such as - Musharika , Ijarah, Murabaha as compared with
conventional banking is proposed to be provided.
58. Providing Relief to Compliant Taxpayers- In order to encourage compliant
taxpayers, withholding tax on registration of motor vehicles is proposed to be
reduced from Rs 10,000 to Rs 7,500 for engine capacity upto 850 CC, from Rs
20,000 to Rs 15,000 for engine capacity between 851 CC to 1,000 CC and from Rs
30,000 to Rs 25,000 for engine capacity between 1001 CC to 1,300 CC. The rates
for non-filers will remain unchanged.
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 44 of 71
59. Exemption from Withholding Tax on Vehicles Leased Under the Prime
Ministers Youth Loan Scheme – To provide relief to the unemployed youth,
exemption from collection of advance tax on vehicles leased under the Prime
Ministers Youth Loan Scheme is proposed.
60. Relief on Education Expenses- In order to provide relief on education
expenses which are unbearable for low income groups, individuals having taxable
income less than Rs. 1 million were given tax relief equal to 5% of school fee up to
Rs. 60,000 per child per annum in the Budget for 2016-17.The threshold for availing
deduction for education expense is proposed to be enhanced upto taxable income of
Rs 1.5M per annum. This will provide added relief for medium income groups.
61. Enhancement of Threshold for Payment of Advance Tax- At present every
individual deriving income above Rs 500,000 is required to pay advance tax in four
installments on the basis of tax paid for the last tax year. This threshold of Rs
500,000 is in place since 1st July 2010 and is now proposed to be enhanced to Rs.1,
000,000 in order to facilitate small taxpayers.
62. Enhancing the Limit of Raw Material Importable under Exemption
Certificate- The limit for importing raw material by manufacturers through exemption
from income tax at import stage is proposed to be enhanced from 110% of the
quantity imported in the last year to 125% of the quantity imported in the last year to
promote industrial expansion and facilitate industry.
63. Enhancement of limit on sale promotion expenses by pharmaceutical
sector- In the Budget of 2016-17 a limit of 5% of turnover was placed for sale
promotion expenses by pharmaceutical sector. This has caused hardship for the 
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 45 of 71
sector and stopped its growth. Therefore, the limit of 5% is proposed to be enhanced
to 10% of turnover.
64. Reduction of withholding tax rates on Fast Moving Consumer GoodsDistributors of Fast Moving Consumer Goods are operating at low profit margins and
therefore minimum tax u/s 113 is chargeable at reduced rate of 0.2%. However,
FMCG distributors were subject to normal rate of withholding tax on their supplies. In
Budget 2016-17 Withholding tax rate on supplies for distributors of FMCG, was
reduced from 4% to 3% for companies and from 4.5% to 3.5% for others. The
withholding tax rates are still on the higher side and are therefore, proposed to be
reduced Reduction from 3.5% to 2.5%. There will be no reduction on the rates for
non-filers.
65. Facility of Revision of Withholding Tax Statement- On the demand of
withholding agents they are being granted the right to revise their withholding tax
statements in the case of any error or omission within 60 days of filing the statement.
66. Right of Appeal against Orders Passed due to Non-Filing of ReturnsUnder the current law in case of non-filing of return a provisional assessment order is
issued by the department and the tax becomes payable after 45 days. Taxpayer
cannot file an appeal against such order. On the demand of taxpayers and to
address the genuine grievances in hardship cases, this system is proposed to be
done away with. It is proposed that instead of provisional assessment order an
appealable order may be passed on default of non-filing of return.
67. Tax Credit on Enlistment in Stock Exchange- In the Budget for 2016-17
20% tax credit on tax payable for enlistment in stock exchange was made available 
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 46 of 71
for 2 years instead of 1 year. SECP has commended this measure and has
recommended that in order to make this measure really successful credit at a
reduced may also be made available for the next two years. It is accordingly
proposed to allow tax credit at a rate of 20% for the first two years of enlistment and
at a rate of 10% for the succeeding two years.
68. Enhancement of Exemption Limit for Withholding Tax on Insurance
Premium- In order to broaden the tax base and to encourage compliance with tax
laws, adjustable withholding tax at the rate of 1% on life insurance premium to be
collected from non-filers was introduced in the Budget for 2016-17. This withholding
tax is collectable only if annual premium is not less than Rs. 200,000. On the
demand of the insurance sector the basic limit is proposed to be enhanced to Rs.
300,000. The filers will continue to remain exempted from this withholding tax.
69. Exemption to Income of certain Non-Proft Organizations- Gulab Devi Chest
Hospital, Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund and National Academy of Performing
Arts are Non-Profit Organizations engaged in philanthropic and social welfare
sectors. Their income is proposed to be exempted from income tax by inclusion of
their names in Clause (66) of Part I of the second schedule to the Income Tax
Ordinance 2001.
REVENUE MEASURES
70. I will now present the revenue measures proposed to be taken under the
Income Tax law.
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 47 of 71
71. Enhancement of Tax Rate on Dividend- Flat rate of 12.5% is proposed to
be enhanced to 15% flat rate- Reduced rates of tax for certain types of dividend will
remain unchanged. Rates for dividend paid by mutual funds are also proposed to be
enhanced from existing 10% to 12.5% in line with the increase on general dividend.
72. Rationalization of Slab Rates for Interest Income- Interest income is
subject to progressive rates of 10%, 12.5% and 15% for interest income upto Rs. 25
Million, between Rs 25 Million and Rs. 50 Million and above Rs. 50 Million
respectively. It is proposed to maintain the existing rates but the slabs on which they
are to be made applicable are proposed to be changed to upto Rs. 5 Million,
between Rs. 5 to Rs. 25 Million and above Rs. 25 Million respectively. This will
increase progressivity of the taxation of interest income and make the taxation more
equitable.
73. Rationalization of Taxation of Capital Gain on Securities- The existing
three tier rate structure for capital gain tax on securities is proposed to be replaced
with a single rate of 15% for filers and 20% for non-filers for simplification and
promotion of stock market transactions. This will remove the incentive for holding the
securities for longer periods just to reduce incidence of taxation and promote the
transactions in stock exchange.
74. Withdrawal of Tax Credit on Sales Made to Sales Tax Registered
Persons- Currently tax credit @ 3% of tax liability is available to all manufacturers
who make 90% of their sales to Sales Tax registered persons. It is proposed to
withdraw this tax credit as it has not achieved its desired objectives and is being 
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 48 of 71
used a means of getting tax break of 3% without any consequent benefit in the form
of increase of sales tax registration.
75. Extension in Super Tax- in the budget for the financial year 2015-16 a tax on
the income of the affluent and rich individuals, association of persons and companies
earning income above Rs. 500 million at a rate of 4% of income for banking
companies and 3% of income for all others was levied. This tax was extended for
one more year through Budget for the year 2016-17. Since the circumstances that
necessitated this measure are still continuing, it is proposed to extend this measure
by one year for tax year 2017.
Mr. Speaker,
76. Taxation for Not Distributing Dividend- The government in an attempt to
ensure that the small shareholders get return on their investments and to protect
interest of shareholders by encouraging companies to distribute dividend, through
budget 2015-16 made an amendment in Income Tax Ordinance 2001 to provide that
any public company which has derived profits for the year but does not distribute
cash dividends within six months of the end of the tax year or distributes dividends to
such an extent that its reserves remain are in excess of 100% of its paid up capital,
the excess amount shall be taxed at the rate of 10%.
77. Presently, there is exemption from tax on undistributed reserves if the lesser
of at least 40% of after tax profit or; 50% of the paid up capital, is distributed as
dividend. SECP has pointed out that the latter condition of distributing 50% of the
paid up capital has minimized the effectiveness of this provision and the desired
objectives are not being achieved. Therefore, on the recommendations of the SECP 
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 49 of 71
this condition is proposed to be omitted. It is also being proposed that if profits are
not distributed, 10% tax shall be levied on the profits for the year and not on the
reserves.
78. Increase in the Rate of Minimum Tax on Turnover- The government has
progressively reduced the rate of Corporate Tax to encourage the taxpayers to
declare their actual profits. However, it has been observed that profit declarations
have not improved and a large number of companies and other businesses are still
paying only minimum tax on their turnover. The rate of minimum tax on turnover is
proposed to be increased from1% to 1.25%. This will encourage the organized and
compliant sector in whose case the rate will be reduced from 31% to 30% and to
create disincentive for entities not declaring their actual profits.
79. Withholding Tax at the Time of Collection of Tobacco Cess- Production
and sale of illicit and non-duty paid cigarettes has assumed threatening proportions.
Non duty paid cigarettes not only cause loss of revenue but also pose a serious
health risk due to lack of quality controls and regulatory oversight. Government is
taking several initiatives to curb the sale and production of illicit tobacco products. In
order to document sale of tobacco so as to get information regarding the persons
engaged in production of cigarettes and the extent of their production, it is proposed
that Pakistan Tobacco Board or its contractor for collection of tobacco cess shall
collect withholding tax @ 5%, at the time of collecting cess on tobacco.
Mr. Speaker,
80. Taxation of Builders & Land Developers- On the recommendation of
association of builders and developers and in order to bring this sector in to tax net 
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 50 of 71
and to eliminate disputes a final tax regime on the basis of fixed tax per unit area
was announced for builders and land developers in the last budget but it failed to
achieve the desired results and is proposed to be withdrawn.
81. Enhancing the Rate of Withholding Tax on Sale of Electronic Goods to
Retailers- At present withholding tax at the rate of 0.5% is to be collected by
dealers, distributors and wholesalers of electronics at the time of sale to retailers. On
the demand of Electronics Retailers Association the rate is being increased to 1%.
82. Differential Tax rates for non-filers- Present Government on the demand of
taxpayers introduced the policy of higher rates of withholding tax for non-filers in
order to penalize the persons staying out of tax net and to provide an incentive for
joining the tax net. The policy paid dividends and the number of return filers
increased from 750,000 to 1,225,000 in three years. As a continuation and further
strengthening of the policy, the rates of withholding taxes for non-filers on payments
received for contracts, supplies and services, payments to non-residents, rental
income, prizes on prize bonds and lotteries, commission, sale by auction, collection
on gas bill of CNG stations and sale by manufacturers and commercial importers to
distributors, dealers and wholesalers are proposed to be further enhanced. The
withholding tax rates for filers will be maintained and there will be no increase for
filers.
83. Non-Profit Organizations - At present if non-profit organisations do not
spend more than 75% of their income on charitable and welfare activities, they lose
the status of non-profit-organisation and their entire income is taxed at 30%. To
remove this hardship it is proposed that if non-profit-organisations are unable to 
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 51 of 71
spend more than 75% of their income on charitable and welfare activities, the
amount not spent shall be taxed at the rate of 10% and their status of non-profitorganisation shall remain intact. It is also proposed to prescribe a limit of 15% on
administrative and management expenses.
SALES TAX AND FEDERAL EXCISE DUTY
RELIEF MEASURES
84. Now I will present relief measures that are proposed to be introduced in the
Sales Tax and Federal Excise law during the current Budget:
85. Withdrawal of extra tax on lubricating oils supplied by OMCs- Withdrawal
of extra tax @ 2% on lubricating oils supplied by Oil Marketing Companies is
proposed to prevent hardship to businesses purchasing lubricating oils.
86. Reduction in sales tax on local supply of Hybrid Electric Vehicles- In
order to promote use of energy efficient motor vehicles the reduced rates of sales tax
available at import stage are proposed to be made applicable on local supply of
these vehicles as well.
87. Automatic Stay of Recovery of till Decision of Appeal- To prevent
hardship to taxpayers it is proposed to provide for automatic stay of the amount of
sales tax involved in an order that is the subject matter of an appeal till the decision
of Commissioner (Appeals) subject to payment of 25% of the principal amount. This
relief will be also available for recovery of Federal Excise duty.
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 52 of 71
88. Exemption from sales tax on premixes for growth stunting- To provide
exemption from sales tax to specific premixes for checking growing incidence of
growth stunting. General exemption already available under the Sixth Schedule is
proposed to be extended and its scope enhanced.
89. Withdrawal of sales tax withholding on supplies from registered to other
registered persons- It is proposed to withdraw sales tax withholding on supplies
from registered persons to other registered persons in order to provide ease of doing
business. However, withholding of sales tax will continue in the case of supplies to
government departments.
90. Reduction in Sales Tax on Poultry Machinery- Sales Tax on seven
different types of machinery for use in poultry control sheds is proposed to be
reduced from 17% to 7%. This will encourage new investment and promote poultry
production.
91. Reduction in Sales Tax on Certain Services- Certain services have been
subjected to sales tax by the provinces at reduced rates without any input
adjustment. To bring uniformity and provide relief to the service providers in
Islamabad Capital Territory similar reduction in sales tax rates is proposed.
92. Reduction in the Rate of Sales Tax on Multimedia Projector- For the
promotion of the use of multimedia projectors in educational institutions the rate of
sales tax is being reduced from 17% to 10%. The rate of the custom duty on
multimedia projectors is already at the rate of 3%. 
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 53 of 71
REVENUE MEASURES
93. Increase in the Rate of FED on cement- Cement sector is registering
substantial growth and therefore must contribute in governmental revenues. Increase
in FED on cement from Rs.1/ kg to Rs.1.25/ kg is therefore proposed. It is expected
that there will be no impact on cement prices and the cement industry will absorb the
increase in FED.
94. Sales Tax on Retail Sales of Zero-Rated Sectors- The inputs of the five
major export oriented sectors were zero-rated in the last budget. The retail sales by
these sectors were subjected to sales tax at 5%. Now, after consultation with the
retailers in these sectors the rate of sales tax is proposed to be enhanced to 6%.
95. Levy of sales tax on commercial import of fabrics- Sales tax on
commercial import of fabrics, presently at zero percent, is proposed to be collected
@ 10% to provide competitive edge to the local producers of fabrics.
96. Enhancement of Federal Excise duty on cigarettes- in order to enhance
duty from this non-essential sector, to discourage cigarette smoking and to arrest the
declining revenue trends from this sector, the rate of duty is enhanced on the
existing tiers of the cigarettes. Moreover, a new tier is being introduced this year to
document and curb the menace of illicit trade of sub-standard low priced cigarettes.
97. Increase and rationalization of sales tax on steel Sector – in order to
rationalize the rate of sales tax on steel sector, the existing rate of Rs 9/unit of 
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 54 of 71
electricity is being enhanced to Rs 10.5 in consultation with the industry and
corresponding increase shall be made in ship breaking and other allied industry. To
promote the ease of doing business the issues of the steel industry shall be resolved
in consultation with the industry.
CUSTOMS
98. Now the proposals relating to Customs duty are being presented before the
house:
99. New HS Code Version 2017- World Customs Organization Harmonized
Commodity Description and Coding System popularly known as HS System is one of
those very important conventions which makes the seamless transaction of goods
possible across international borders. After every five years WCO reviews and
updates this convention. WCO has adopted new HS Version with effect from 1st
January 2017. Pakistan being signatory to the HS Convention is obliged to adopt the
new version from the next financial year i.e. 1st July 2017.
100. The Amendments in HS 2017 will affect the classification of around 15% of
goods traded in the world. The majority of changes in HS 2017 have been introduced
to address environmental and social issues. Besides, the new version has also
introduced new product classifications to reflect changes in manufacturing processes
and technological advances. The implementation of new Version will not only fulfil
the legal requirement but will also greatly facilitate importers, exporters and all other
stakeholders doing business and having interaction at the international level.
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 55 of 71
101. Relief for Poultry Farming Sectors- Poultry Sector is not only providing
affordable chicken meat to middle class families of the country but it is also playing
vital role in the economy of the country. To provide further relief, it is proposed that
5% Regulatory Duty on the import of Grand Parent and Parent Stock of Chicken may
be withdrawn and Customs Duty may be reduced from 11% 3%. Similarly, it is also
proposed that Customs Duty may be reduced on the import of Hatching Eggs from
11% to 3%. This will substantially reduce their cost of inputs and boost further
expansion.
102. Government is making efforts to flourish mechanised farming so that
productivity can be enhanced and the sector can contribute in the economy. There is
a customs duty exemption on new combined harvesters however, there is a 3% duty
on old and used harvesters. To give relief to the agriculture sector and as the
recommendations of Ministry of National Food Security exemption on customs duty
will extend to new and up to 5-year old and used harvesters so that their import cost
is reduced.
103. Ostrich Farming- Ostrich farming has started in the country which will not
only enhance the portion of protein in the diet but in future will also contribute in the
export of meat from the country. To encourage Ostrich Farming, it is proposed that
Customs Duty may be exempted on the import of Ostriches.
104. Relief for Health Sector- Health Sector has always been the priority of the
Government. Many incentives are currently in place to encourage the provision of
quality and cost-effective treatment to the patients. Like previous years, this year as
well following measures are proposed for this Sector;
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 56 of 71
(1) To encourage the use in Pharma, bio technology and life sciences,
Customs Duty on the import of Pre-fabricated Modular Clean Rooms
is proposed to be reduced from 20% to 3%. This will help in the
protection from environmental contamination;
(2) Fabric, (Non-woven) is used in the pharmaceutical sector for
manufacturing of bandages, surgical gowns, wound dressings etc.
Currently, this fabric is importable @ 16% customs duty. To provide
relief to the pharmaceutical sector and reduce cost for patients it is
proposed that rate of customs duty may be reduced from 16% to
5%;
(3) Machinery, equipment, apparatus, appliances, Wheelchairs,
medical, surgical, dental furniture and spares etc. import are allowed
duty free by charitable non-profit making institutions operating
hospitals of fifty beds, hospitals run by the Federal or a Provincial
Governments. By amending the relevant provision, now the scope of
this exemption is being expanded by including Hospitals of Armed
Forces, Fauji Foundation, and Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission;
(4) Electric Cigarettes are currently not properly classified and
therefore, are subject to only 3% customs duty. Keeping in view the
harmful effects on health, it is proposed that Electric Cigarettes may
be properly classified with 20% customs duty.
105. Betel Nuts/Betel leaves- In the Budget for FY 2016-17, rates of duty on betel
nuts and betel leaves were enhanced to discourage their use in the country. This 
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 57 of 71
year again Regulatory Duty on betel nuts is being increased from 10% to 25%
besides Rs. 200/kg RD is proposed to levied on the import of betel leaves.
106. Relief for the Industrial Sector-
(1) Industrial development plays a pivotal role in economic uplift. It
raises the productive capacity of the people and creates everincreasing employment opportunities. Due to importance of this
sector in the economy, Government always tries to create conducive
environment for the growth of this sector. Like previous year, this
year as well, Government is proposing several measures to provide
relief to the industrial sector;
(2) Aluminium waste scrap is the primary raw material for different
industries like auto parts, fans and utensils manufacturing etc. This
raw material is currently subject to 3% Customs Duty and 10%
Regulatory Duty. To provide relief to the industry, it is proposed to
reduce the rate of Regulatory Duty from 10% to 5%;
(3) Metalized yarn is used in the traditional wearing. Its industry is
currently facing problem due to high tariff rates on its raw material
and low rate on its finished product. To provide relief to this industry,
it is proposed that 5% RD may be levied on its finished product while
rate of customs duty on its vital raw materials may be reduced from
20% to 11%.
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 58 of 71
(4) Government is taking various steps to improve the life standard of
the middle and lower middle classes. Baby Diapers are important
for the hygiene of the infants. Keeping in view the demand of baby
diapers in the country and investment plans by diaper
manufacturers, there is a need to incentivize domestic
manufacturing. It is, therefore, proposed that customs duty may be
reduced on raw materials, not locally produced, from 16% to 11%
and from 20% to 16% for manufacturers of Baby Diapers.
(5) Telecommunication sector is one of the important pillars of the
economic development in the country. To further incentivize this
sector, currently leviable customs duties at the rates of 11% and
16%, are being withdrawn and a uniform rate of 9% Regulatory Duty
is being levied on telecom equipment.
107. Wood Sector- To give boost to the wood sector, it is further proposed that
customs duty on veneer sheets may be reduced from current 16% to 11%.
Mr. Speaker,
108. Auto Sector Proposals- following measures are proposed:
(1) Current concessionary rate of customs duty and taxes, which is 50%
of the total applicable duty and taxes, will continue on the import of
Hybrid Electric Vehicles (HEVs) up to 1800 CC and 25% concession
on total duty and taxes will be available for vehicles with engine
capacity between 1801 and 2500 CC.
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 59 of 71
(2) Auto Development Policy 2016-17 provides for incentivizing fully
electric vehicles to promote fuel conservation and arrest
environmental degradation. A package for relief in duty on these
vehicles will be announced within three months.
(3) Currently ten components for local assembly/manufacturing of
Trailers can be imported at concessionary rate of 5% Customs duty.
On the recommendation of EDB Eleven (11) more components are
being included in view of diversified requirement of trailers for
upcoming CPEC projects.
109. Review of Regulatory and Add. Duties- Regulatory and Additional Duties
were put in place to protect local industries in face of unprecedented fluctuation of
commodity prices in the international market. Pakistan is not the only country to take
such measures to protect the local economy from the external shocks. Government
is periodically reviewing these measures. On the recommendation of the State Bank
of Pakistan regulatory duty on various items is being enhanced;
110. Concessions on import of Set Top Boxes etc.- Last year, on the
recommendation of PEMRA and to promote Digital Technology in the country, import
of Set Top Boxes, TV broadcast transmitter, Reception apparatus etc. were allowed
to be imported at concessionary rate of 11%. This facility is available till 30-6-2017.
Now it is proposed that the date of this concession may be extended till 30-6-2018.
Concessionary rate of sales tax at 5% is also proposed to be extended till 30-6-2018.
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 60 of 71
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 61 of 71
PART III
RELIEF MEASURES
111. Provision of relief to the people of Pakistan is the our foremost priority. In this
regard, I am pleased to announce the following relief measures:
112. Welfare Scheme for families of Shuhada (Martyrs): The nation as a whole
is successfully engaged in the war against terror. This effort is valiantly being led by
our brave soldiers many of whom have embraced martyrdom. The nation fully
recognises the sacrifices made by them and their family members. For the welfare of
their families, the Government is launching a new scheme through Central
Directorate of National Savings (CDNS). Under this scheme, a guaranteed and
enhanced profit will be given to the families of Shuhada.
113. Scheme for disabled persons: Special persons are equal citizens of
Pakistan and deserve preferential treatment because of immense challenges that
they face in their lives. In the past, a 2% quota was allocated for appointment of
special persons in government organisations. In the new Companies Law 2017, this
provision is proposed to be extended to public and publically listed companies.
Furthermore, the government is committed to enhance the financial prospects of this
deserving segment of society. It is therefore proposed that in addition to pensioners
and widows this segment may be made eligible to invest in ‘Behbood Saving
Certificates’ which provides higher profits;
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 62 of 71
114. Pakistan Bait Al Maal- From Rs.4 billion budget in FY 2016-17, the budget
for 2017-18 is proposed to be increased to Rs.6 billion - which is a 50% increase.
The budget will be utilised for financial assistance to individuals, child support
programme, orphanages through Pakistan Sweet Homes and Thalassemia Centre
for treatment for poor children.
115. Loan write off for widows: In 1999 PML government introduced a scheme
for paying loans under House Building Finance Corporation on behalf of windows up
to the value of Rs.350,000. This scheme is being relaunched with increase of limit to
Rs.500,000 and will be applicable for widows who have not remarried;
116. Facilitating pensioners, widows and elderly: CDNS serves a large number
of pensioners, widows and elderly. Cumbersome manual procedures result in
difficulties for its customers. The CDNS has become member of the banking clearing
house which has reduced transaction clearance time from average 6 days to 1-2
days. To further facilitate its customers, CNDS will connect its branch on-line offering
24/7 customer call and complaint centre, debit cards for accessing ATMs, mobile
and internet banking. One-fourth of the total customer access will be achieved by
June 2018;
117. Facilitating the ex-patriates: Overseas Pakistanis, the sixth largest diaspora
in the world, are an asset for the country. They seek investment opportunities in their
home country but there are a few opportunities outside the real estate sector. In
order to provide one such investment, the Government plans to invite the Pakistani
diaspora to invest in infrastructure development of the country. For this purpose, the
Government will issue a sovereign non-convertible Bond million specifically for the 
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 63 of 71
overseas Pakistanis with a rupee coupon. This initiative will be undertaken by
Pakistan Development Fund which will only finance financially and commercially
viable projects. The proceeds will serve the financing needs of commercially viable
projects of national importance while providing good returns to the investors. To
further facilitate investment by the Pakistan diaspora in the real estate sector, CDA
shall announce an exclusive sector for ex-pat Pakistanis.
118. Sales tax refunds: All the pending sales tax refunds whose RPOs have been
sanctioned by 30th April 2017 shall be paid in two parts. RPOs upto the value of
Rs.1 million will be paid till 15 July, and the remaining RPOs will be paid till 14th
August 2017.
Relief Measures for Government Employees and Pensioners
Mr. Speaker,
119. I would now like to announce relief measures for the government employees
and pensioners:
(1) In the budget speech FY 2016-17 three allowances were merged.
However, the 2008 adhoc relief allowance to the Army and the 2010
adhoc relief allowance for the civilians was not merged. There has
been a consistent demand to merge these allowance. I am pleased
to announce that it has been decided and give a 10% adhoc relief
allowance on the merged salary to all civil and armed forces
employees. For Armed Forces, Zarb-e-Azb allowance, that I have
already discussed, would be in addition to this;
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 64 of 71
(2) 10% increase is also being proposed in pensions;
(3) Up to BPS-5 employees are being exempted from paying house-rent
charges at the rate of 5%;
(4) Daily allowance - domestic - is being increased by 60%;
(5) Orderly allowance is being revised from Rs.12,000 to Rs.14,000;
(6) Rate for transportation of dead bodies and local burial of are being
revised from Rs.1,600 to Rs.4,800 and Rs.5,000 to Rs.15,000
respectively;
(7) Constant attendant allowance admissible to Armed Forces and CAF
is being increased from Rs.3,000 to Rs.7,000;
(8) Different allowances for offices and sailors of Pakistan Navy are
being revised including; hard-lying pay, compensation for batman,
uniform allowance and ration allowance;
(9) Design allowance is being increased by 50%;
(10) For employees of Pakistan Post, certain rates of allowances are
being revised;
(11) The Jawans of the Frontier Constabulary are performing their duties
all over Pakistan. In order to make their salary structure attractive it
had been decided to allow them a Rs.8,000 per month fixed
allowance. One-third of that allowance has been allowed w.e.f 1st
March 2017; the one-third of it will be allowed from 1st July 2017 and
the balance one-third from 1st July 2018;
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 65 of 71
The above measures are estimated to cost an additional Rs.125
billion. It should be remembered that additional amount in last
year’s increase in salary and allowances was Rs.67 billion.
(12) Minimum wage: On the pattern of increase in the pay of Government
employees the minimum wage of labour for their benefit is being
increased from Rs.14,000 to Rs.15,000 per month.
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 66 of 71
PART IV
Vision 2018-23
Mr. Speaker,
120. By the Grace of Allah (SWT) the will of the nation and the vision of Prime
Minister Nawaz Sharif and the with prayers of the nation, we have been able to put
Pakistan back on growth trajectory. Now we need to further strengthen our economy
in order to take the economy on the path of higher, sustainable and inclusive
economic growth.
121. Pakistan, now needs to focus on second generation reforms including
deepening of financial market, improving ease of doing business, enforcing property
rights, improving regulatory apparatus, enforcing rule of law, creating a credible and
efficient judicial system and to build an institutional foundation that can sustain
economic growth and give protection against external shocks.
122. In our chequered history of 70 years we have had periods of high growth.
Unfortunately, these hard earned gains were frittered away by subsequent epochs of
poor governance and economic mismanagement. In this honorable house I today
invite all the political parties nay the entire nation to agree to an economic vision.
Whoever wins the next general election can implement this consensus based policy
to ensure the development of the country.
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 67 of 71
123. The key elements of this economic vision should be:
(a) Economic growth: We should target growth consistently at above
7%. Over the next five years the key drivers of economic growth
should be investments and the environment of competition and
innovation with the private sector as an engine of growth. The
government institutions should be reformed to focus on improved
service delivery and better regulations to support the growth
momentum. Governance, transparency, accountability and
business-friendly environment should become the key focus of our
policies;
(b) Sustainable economic environment: Macroeconomic stability
should be fostered through fiscal consolidation. While tax rates
should be rationalised to facilitate the private sector, emphasis
should be on broadening the tax base, and reforming FBR. A new
National Finance Commission Award, that balances the functional
responsibilities and budgets of Federal and provincial governments
should be announced with the view to support service delivery at
the provincial level. Focus on results in our plans and budgets
should be enhanced with the view to provide better services to the
people;
(c) Poverty alleviation: At the centre of our economic policymaking is
the goal of poverty alleviation. Over the next five years we should
focus on provision of welfare services to the low-income segments 
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 68 of 71
of the society with the aim to reduce poverty from the current 29%
to less than 10%;
(d) Energy security: With increased economic growth, the demand
for energy in Pakistan is likely to rise considerably. In addition to
the 15,000 MW in the pipeline to come in generation mode in
period beyond 2018, we should plan to add another 10,000 MW of
electricity, and another 2 - 3 billion cubic gas per day. In order to
achieve these targets, we must aim to implement regional
connectivity projects;
(e) Food security: Improvements in yields of staple crops and import
substitution of imported food items should be pursued to ensure
availability of essential food items for all at affordable prices;
(f) Water security: Water security is necessary for our agriculture
and consumption. A considerable amount of water passes through
our rivers each year. Absence of dams means that a lot of water is
wasted which we should preserve. Over the next five years we
should concentrate on substantially completing Diamer Bhasha
dams, and simultaneously improving water conservancy;
(g) Reforming Public Sector Enterprises: Over the next five years
we foresee corporatisation and efficiency improvements of public
sector enterprises;
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 69 of 71
(h) Export competitiveness: As I had said earlier, our exports have
suffered due to slow-down in international trade and decline in
commodity prices. Going forward, we should focus on enhancing
export competitiveness and taking our export to GDP ratio to
around 12%;
(i) Regional connectivity: We should complete the CPEC
infrastructure projects in the shortest possible time and start
reaping the benefits of regional connectivity.
(j) Regional disparity: We should ensure that regional disparity in all
socio-economic indicators are annihilated by focusing our attention
on the less developed areas.
124. Not only our vision but our goal must be that by the end of the next term of
this Parliament:
(a) Every child should be in school;
(b) Infant Mortality Rate and Maternal Mortality Rate should be
reduced by half;
(c) Every child should be immunised;
(d) All citizens should have access to clean drinking water;
(e) There will universal use of latrines;
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 70 of 71
(f) Every youth should be skilled;
(g) Women should be empowered. Above 30% of women should be in
the labour force;
(h) Each house-hold should have electricity;
(i) Our per capita income should be doubled;
(j) The overwhelming majority of our citizens will be financially and
digitally integrated.
Concluding Remarks
Mr. Speaker,
125. With Allah’s (SWT) mercy we have been successful in improving the
economic situation in the country. Pakistan today is far more prosperous as
compared to four years back and its citizens are looking forward to better lives for
themselves and their children. It is time we focus on gearing up our resources, show
unity in our approach, and work together for meeting common cause of the welfare
of the people. While we have come a long way, by no means we can be complacent.
Infact we consider this a beginning and need to redouble our efforts to join the top 20
global economies even earlier then already predicted 2030. This will only be possible
for the entire Pakistani nation agrees on economic agenda and implement it with full
concentration.
BUDGET SPEECH 2017-18
Page 71 of 71
126. Allah (SWT) has said in Surah Al-Emran ‘
ْ“And
hold fast, all of you together, to the Rope of Allah and be not divided among
yourselves”. Under the light of this Quranic verse I would urge the entire nation that
they should unite for this economic vision.
127. It is part our belief that Uswa-e-Hasana of the Holy Prophet (PBUH) is the
best example for us. However, it is globally acknowledged by Muslims and NonMuslims alike that the best mode of Government was the State of Medinah during
the life of the Prophet (PBUH). Mr. Speaker, that model is as relevant today as ever.
We in our policy must embed the spirit of that ideal state the hallmark of which was
Rule of Law, Transparency, Meritocracy, Social-protection, and Good governance.
Mr. Speaker,
128. If we follow this model it is my faith that the dream of Quaid-e-Azam and
Allama Iqba’s will be realized quickly and Pakistan will become sovereign,
prosperous, honorable and developed nation.